The Project Gutenberg eBook of Leviathan
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Leviathan

Author: Thomas Hobbes

Release date: May 1, 2002 [eBook #3207]
                Most recently updated: September 17, 2025

Language: English

Credits: Edward White and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEVIATHAN ***




LEVIATHAN

By Thomas Hobbes

1651


LEVIATHAN OR THE MATTER, FORME, & POWER OF A COMMON-WEALTH
ECCLESIASTICAL AND CIVILL

Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury


Printed for Andrew Crooke, at the Green Dragon in St. Paul’s Churchyard,
1651.



TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES ON THE E-TEXT:

This E-text was prepared from the Pelican Classics edition of Leviathan,
which in turn was prepared from the first edition. I have tried to
follow as closely as possible the original, and to give the flavour of
the text that Hobbes himself proof-read, but the following differences
were unavoidable.

Hobbes used capitals and italics very extensively, for emphasis, for
proper names, for quotations, and sometimes, it seems, just because.

The original has very extensive margin notes, which are used to show
where he introduces the definitions of words and concepts, to give in
short the subject that a paragraph or section is dealing with, and to
give references to his quotations, largely but not exclusively biblical.
To some degree, these margin notes seem to have been intended to serve
in place of an index, the original having none. They are all in italics.

He also used italics for words in other languages than English, and
there are a number of Greek words, in the Greek alphabet, in the text.

To deal with these within the limits of plain vanilla ASCII, I have done
the following in this E-text.

I have restricted my use of full capitalization to those places where
Hobbes used it, except in the chapter headings, which I have fully
capitalized, where Hobbes used a mixture of full capitalization and
italics.

Where it is clear that the italics are to indicate the text is quoting,
I have introduced quotation marks. Within quotation marks I have
retained the capitalization that Hobbes used.

Where italics seem to be used for emphasis, or for proper names, or just
because, I have capitalized the initial letter of the words. This has
the disadvantage that they are not then distinguished from those that
Hobbes capitalized in plain text, but the extent of his italics would
make the text very ugly if I was to use an underscore or slash.

Where the margin notes are either to introduce the paragraph subject,
or to show where he introduces word definitions, I have included them as
headers to the paragraph, again with all words having initial capitals,
and on a shortened line.

For margin references to quotes, I have included them in the text,
in brackets immediately next to the quotation. Where Hobbes included
references in the main text, I have left them as he put them, except to
change his square brackets to round.

For the Greek alphabet, I have simply substituted the nearest ordinary
letters that I can, and I have used initial capitals for foreign
language words.

Neither Thomas Hobbes nor his typesetters seem to have had many
inhibitions about spelling and punctuation. I have tried to reproduce
both exactly, with the exception of the introduction of quotation marks.

In preparing the text, I have found that it has much more meaning if
I read it with sub-vocalization, or aloud, rather than trying to read
silently. Hobbes’ use of emphasis and his eccentric punctuation and
construction seem then to work.



TO MY MOST HONOR’D FRIEND Mr. FRANCIS GODOLPHIN of GODOLPHIN


HONOR’D SIR.

Your most worthy Brother Mr SIDNEY GODOLPHIN, when he lived, was pleas’d
to think my studies something, and otherwise to oblige me, as you know,
with reall testimonies of his good opinion, great in themselves, and the
greater for the worthinesse of his person. For there is not any vertue
that disposeth a man, either to the service of God, or to the service
of his Country, to Civill Society, or private Friendship, that did not
manifestly appear in his conversation, not as acquired by necessity,
or affected upon occasion, but inhaerent, and shining in a generous
constitution of his nature. Therefore in honour and gratitude to him,
and with devotion to your selfe, I humbly Dedicate unto you this my
discourse of Common-wealth. I know not how the world will receive it,
nor how it may reflect on those that shall seem to favour it. For in a
way beset with those that contend on one side for too great Liberty, and
on the other side for too much Authority, ’tis hard to passe between the
points of both unwounded. But yet, me thinks, the endeavour to advance
the Civill Power, should not be by the Civill Power condemned; nor
private men, by reprehending it, declare they think that Power too
great. Besides, I speak not of the men, but (in the Abstract) of the
Seat of Power, (like to those simple and unpartiall creatures in the
Roman Capitol, that with their noyse defended those within it, not
because they were they, but there) offending none, I think, but those
without, or such within (if there be any such) as favour them. That
which perhaps may most offend, are certain Texts of Holy Scripture,
alledged by me to other purpose than ordinarily they use to be by
others. But I have done it with due submission, and also (in order to
my Subject) necessarily; for they are the Outworks of the Enemy, from
whence they impugne the Civill Power. If notwithstanding this, you find
my labour generally decryed, you may be pleased to excuse your selfe,
and say that I am a man that love my own opinions, and think all true I
say, that I honoured your Brother, and honour you, and have presum’d on
that, to assume the Title (without your knowledge) of being, as I am,

Sir,

Your most humble, and most obedient servant, Thomas Hobbes.

Paris APRILL 15/25 1651.




CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS


THE FIRST PART


OF MAN


INTRODUCTION

1. OF SENSE

2. OF IMAGINATION

3. OF THE CONSEQUENCES OR TRAIN OF IMAGINATIONS

4. OF SPEECH

5. OF REASON AND SCIENCE

6. OF THE INTERIOUR BEGINNINGS OF VOLUNTARY MOTIONS, COMMONLY CALLED THE
PASSIONS; AND THE SPEECHES BY WHICH THEY ARE EXPRESSED

7. OF THE ENDS OR RESOLUTIONS OF DISCOURSE

8. OF THE VERTUES, COMMONLY CALLED INTELLECTUALL, AND THEIR CONTRARY
DEFECTS

9. OF THE SEVERALL SUBJECTS OF KNOWLEDGE

10. OF POWER, WORTH, DIGNITY, HONOUR, AND WORTHINESSE

11. OF THE DIFFERENCE OF MANNERS

12. OF RELIGION

13. OF THE NATURALL CONDITION OF MANKIND AS CONCERNING THEIR FELICITY
AND MISERY

14. OF THE FIRST AND SECOND NATURALL LAWES, AND OF CONTRACT

15. OF OTHER LAWES OF NATURE

16. OF PERSONS, AUTHORS, AND THINGS PERSONATED


THE SECOND PART


OF COMMON-WEALTH


17. OF THE CAUSES, GENERATION, AND DEFINITION OF A COMMON-WEALTH

18. OF THE RIGHTS OF SOVERAIGNES BY INSTITUTION

19. OF SEVERALL KINDS OF COMMON-WEALTH BY INSTITUTION; AND OF SUCCESION
TO THE SOVERAIGN POWER

20. OF DOMINION PATERNALL, AND DESPOTICALL

21. OF THE LIBERTY OF SUBJECTS

22. OF SYSTEMES SUBJECT, POLITICALL, AND PRIVATE

23. OF THE PUBLIQUE MINISTERS OF SOVERAIGN POWER

24. OF THE NUTRITION, AND PROCREATION OF A COMMON-WEALTH

25. OF COUNSELL

26. OF CIVILL LAWES

27. OF CRIMES, EXCUSES, AND EXTENUATIONS

28. OF PUNISHMENTS, AND REWARDS

29. OF THOSE THINGS THAT WEAKEN, OR TEND TO THE DISSOLUTION OF A
COMMON-WEALTH

30. OF THE OFFICE OF THE SOVERAIGN REPRESENTATIVE

31. OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD BY NATURE



THE THIRD PART


OF A CHRISTIAN COMMON-WEALTH


32. OF THE PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN POLITIQUES

33. OF THE NUMBER, ANTIQUITY, SCOPE, AUTHORITY, AND INTERPRETERS OF THE
BOOKS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE

34. OF THE SIGNIFICATION, OF SPIRIT, ANGELL, AND INSPIRATION IN THE
BOOKS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE

35. OF THE SIGNIFICATION IN SCRIPTURE OF THE KINGDOME OF GOD, OF HOLY,
SACRED, AND SACRAMENT

36. OF THE WORD OF GOD, AND OF PROPHETS

37. OF MIRACLES, AND THEIR USE

38. OF THE SIGNIFICATION IN SCRIPTURE OF ETERNALL LIFE, HEL, SALVATION,
THE WORLD TO COME, AND REDEMPTION

39. OF THE SIGNIFICATION IN SCRIPTURE OF THE WORD CHURCH

40. OF THE RIGHTS OF THE KINGDOME OF GOD, IN ABRAHAM, MOSES, THE HIGH
PRIESTS, AND THE KINGS OF JUDAH

41. OF THE OFFICE OF OUR BLESSED SAVIOUR

42. OF POWER ECCLESIASTICALL

43. OF WHAT IS NECESSARY FOR MANS RECEPTION INTO THE KINGDOME OF HEAVEN



THE FOURTH PART

OF THE KINGDOME OF DARKNESSE


44. OF SPIRITUALL DARKNESSE FROM MISINTERPRETATION OF SCRIPTURE

45. OF DAEMONOLOGY, AND OTHER RELIQUES OF THE RELIGION OF THE GENTILES

46. OF DARKNESSE FROM VAINE PHILOSOPHY, AND FABULOUS TRADITIONS

47. OF THE BENEFIT PROCEEDING FROM SUCH DARKNESSE; AND TO WHOM IT
ACCREWETH



48. A REVIEW AND CONCLUSION




THE INTRODUCTION


Nature (the art whereby God hath made and governes the world) is by the
art of man, as in many other things, so in this also imitated, that it
can make an Artificial Animal. For seeing life is but a motion of Limbs,
the begining whereof is in some principall part within; why may we not
say, that all Automata (Engines that move themselves by springs and
wheeles as doth a watch) have an artificiall life? For what is the
Heart, but a Spring; and the Nerves, but so many Strings; and the
Joynts, but so many Wheeles, giving motion to the whole Body, such as
was intended by the Artificer? Art goes yet further, imitating that
Rationall and most excellent worke of Nature, Man. For by Art is created
that great LEVIATHAN called a COMMON-WEALTH, or STATE, (in latine
CIVITAS) which is but an Artificiall Man; though of greater stature
and strength than the Naturall, for whose protection and defence it
was intended; and in which, the Soveraignty is an Artificiall Soul, as
giving life and motion to the whole body; The Magistrates, and other
Officers of Judicature and Execution, artificiall Joynts; Reward and
Punishment (by which fastned to the seat of the Soveraignty, every joynt
and member is moved to performe his duty) are the Nerves, that do the
same in the Body Naturall; The Wealth and Riches of all the particular
members, are the Strength; Salus Populi (the Peoples Safety) its
Businesse; Counsellors, by whom all things needfull for it to know,
are suggested unto it, are the Memory; Equity and Lawes, an artificiall
Reason and Will; Concord, Health; Sedition, Sicknesse; and Civill War,
Death. Lastly, the Pacts and Covenants, by which the parts of this Body
Politique were at first made, set together, and united, resemble that
Fiat, or the Let Us Make Man, pronounced by God in the Creation.

To describe the Nature of this Artificiall man, I will consider

First the Matter thereof, and the Artificer; both which is Man.

Secondly, How, and by what Covenants it is made; what are the Rights and
just Power or Authority of a Soveraigne; and what it is that Preserveth
and Dissolveth it.

Thirdly, what is a Christian Common-Wealth.

Lastly, what is the Kingdome of Darkness.

Concerning the first, there is a saying much usurped of late, That
Wisedome is acquired, not by reading of Books, but of Men. Consequently
whereunto, those persons, that for the most part can give no other proof
of being wise, take great delight to shew what they think they have read
in men, by uncharitable censures of one another behind their backs.
But there is another saying not of late understood, by which they might
learn truly to read one another, if they would take the pains; and that
is, Nosce Teipsum, Read Thy Self: which was not meant, as it is now
used, to countenance, either the barbarous state of men in power,
towards their inferiors; or to encourage men of low degree, to a
sawcie behaviour towards their betters; But to teach us, that for the
similitude of the thoughts, and Passions of one man, to the thoughts,
and Passions of another, whosoever looketh into himselfe, and
considereth what he doth, when he does Think, Opine, Reason, Hope,
Feare, &c, and upon what grounds; he shall thereby read and know,
what are the thoughts, and Passions of all other men, upon the like
occasions. I say the similitude of Passions, which are the same in all
men, Desire, Feare, Hope, &c; not the similitude or The Objects of the
Passions, which are the things Desired, Feared, Hoped, &c: for these the
constitution individuall, and particular education do so vary, and they
are so easie to be kept from our knowledge, that the characters of mans
heart, blotted and confounded as they are, with dissembling, lying,
counterfeiting, and erroneous doctrines, are legible onely to him that
searcheth hearts. And though by mens actions wee do discover their
designee sometimes; yet to do it without comparing them with our own,
and distinguishing all circumstances, by which the case may come to
be altered, is to decypher without a key, and be for the most part
deceived, by too much trust, or by too much diffidence; as he that
reads, is himselfe a good or evill man.

But let one man read another by his actions never so perfectly, it
serves him onely with his acquaintance, which are but few. He that is
to govern a whole Nation, must read in himselfe, not this, or that
particular man; but Man-kind; which though it be hard to do, harder than
to learn any Language, or Science; yet, when I shall have set down my
own reading orderly, and perspicuously, the pains left another, will be
onely to consider, if he also find not the same in himselfe. For this
kind of Doctrine, admitteth no other Demonstration.




PART I.
OF MAN




CHAPTER I. OF SENSE


Concerning the Thoughts of man, I will consider them first Singly, and
afterwards in Trayne, or dependance upon one another. Singly, they
are every one a Representation or Apparence, of some quality, or other
Accident of a body without us; which is commonly called an Object. Which
Object worketh on the Eyes, Eares, and other parts of mans body; and by
diversity of working, produceth diversity of Apparences.

The Originall of them all, is that which we call Sense; (For there is
no conception in a mans mind, which hath not at first, totally, or by
parts, been begotten upon the organs of Sense.) The rest are derived
from that originall.

To know the naturall cause of Sense, is not very necessary to the
business now in hand; and I have els-where written of the same at large.
Nevertheless, to fill each part of my present method, I will briefly
deliver the same in this place.

The cause of Sense, is the Externall Body, or Object, which presseth the
organ proper to each Sense, either immediatly, as in the Tast and Touch;
or mediately, as in Seeing, Hearing, and Smelling: which pressure, by
the mediation of Nerves, and other strings, and membranes of the body,
continued inwards to the Brain, and Heart, causeth there a resistance,
or counter-pressure, or endeavour of the heart, to deliver it self:
which endeavour because Outward, seemeth to be some matter without. And
this Seeming, or Fancy, is that which men call sense; and consisteth, as
to the Eye, in a Light, or Colour Figured; To the Eare, in a Sound; To
the Nostrill, in an Odour; To the Tongue and Palat, in a Savour; and
to the rest of the body, in Heat, Cold, Hardnesse, Softnesse, and such
other qualities, as we discern by Feeling. All which qualities called
Sensible, are in the object that causeth them, but so many several
motions of the matter, by which it presseth our organs diversly. Neither
in us that are pressed, are they anything els, but divers motions; (for
motion, produceth nothing but motion.) But their apparence to us is
Fancy, the same waking, that dreaming. And as pressing, rubbing,
or striking the Eye, makes us fancy a light; and pressing the Eare,
produceth a dinne; so do the bodies also we see, or hear, produce the
same by their strong, though unobserved action, For if those Colours,
and Sounds, were in the Bodies, or Objects that cause them, they could
not bee severed from them, as by glasses, and in Ecchoes by reflection,
wee see they are; where we know the thing we see, is in one place; the
apparence, in another. And though at some certain distance, the reall,
and very object seem invested with the fancy it begets in us; Yet still
the object is one thing, the image or fancy is another. So that Sense in
all cases, is nothing els but originall fancy, caused (as I have said)
by the pressure, that is, by the motion, of externall things upon our
Eyes, Eares, and other organs thereunto ordained.

But the Philosophy-schooles, through all the Universities of
Christendome, grounded upon certain Texts of Aristotle, teach another
doctrine; and say, For the cause of Vision, that the thing seen, sendeth
forth on every side a Visible Species(in English) a Visible Shew,
Apparition, or Aspect, or a Being Seen; the receiving whereof into the
Eye, is Seeing. And for the cause of Hearing, that the thing heard,
sendeth forth an Audible Species, that is, an Audible Aspect, or Audible
Being Seen; which entring at the Eare, maketh Hearing. Nay for the
cause of Understanding also, they say the thing Understood sendeth forth
Intelligible Species, that is, an Intelligible Being Seen; which
comming into the Understanding, makes us Understand. I say not this,
as disapproving the use of Universities: but because I am to speak
hereafter of their office in a Common-wealth, I must let you see on
all occasions by the way, what things would be amended in them; amongst
which the frequency of insignificant Speech is one.



CHAPTER II. OF IMAGINATION


That when a thing lies still, unlesse somewhat els stirre it, it will
lye still for ever, is a truth that no man doubts of. But that when a
thing is in motion, it will eternally be in motion, unless somewhat els
stay it, though the reason be the same, (namely, that nothing can change
it selfe,) is not so easily assented to. For men measure, not onely
other men, but all other things, by themselves: and because they find
themselves subject after motion to pain, and lassitude, think every
thing els growes weary of motion, and seeks repose of its own accord;
little considering, whether it be not some other motion, wherein that
desire of rest they find in themselves, consisteth. From hence it is,
that the Schooles say, Heavy bodies fall downwards, out of an appetite
to rest, and to conserve their nature in that place which is most proper
for them; ascribing appetite, and Knowledge of what is good for their
conservation, (which is more than man has) to things inanimate absurdly.

When a Body is once in motion, it moveth (unless something els hinder
it) eternally; and whatsoever hindreth it, cannot in an instant, but in
time, and by degrees quite extinguish it: And as wee see in the water,
though the wind cease, the waves give not over rowling for a long
time after; so also it happeneth in that motion, which is made in the
internall parts of a man, then, when he Sees, Dreams, &c. For after the
object is removed, or the eye shut, wee still retain an image of the
thing seen, though more obscure than when we see it. And this is it,
that Latines call Imagination, from the image made in seeing; and apply
the same, though improperly, to all the other senses. But the Greeks
call it Fancy; which signifies Apparence, and is as proper to one sense,
as to another. Imagination therefore is nothing but Decaying Sense; and
is found in men, and many other living Creatures, as well sleeping, as
waking.




Memory

The decay of Sense in men waking, is not the decay of the motion made in
sense; but an obscuring of it, in such manner, as the light of the Sun
obscureth the light of the Starres; which starrs do no less exercise
their vertue by which they are visible, in the day, than in the night.
But because amongst many stroaks, which our eyes, eares, and other
organs receive from externall bodies, the predominant onely is sensible;
therefore the light of the Sun being predominant, we are not affected
with the action of the starrs. And any object being removed from our
eyes, though the impression it made in us remain; yet other objects more
present succeeding, and working on us, the Imagination of the past is
obscured, and made weak; as the voyce of a man is in the noyse of the
day. From whence it followeth, that the longer the time is, after the
sight, or Sense of any object, the weaker is the Imagination. For the
continuall change of mans body, destroyes in time the parts which in
sense were moved: So that the distance of time, and of place, hath one
and the same effect in us. For as at a distance of place, that which wee
look at, appears dimme, and without distinction of the smaller parts;
and as Voyces grow weak, and inarticulate: so also after great distance
of time, our imagination of the Past is weak; and wee lose( for example)
of Cities wee have seen, many particular Streets; and of Actions, many
particular Circumstances. This Decaying Sense, when wee would express
the thing it self, (I mean Fancy it selfe,) wee call Imagination, as I
said before; But when we would express the Decay, and signifie that the
Sense is fading, old, and past, it is called Memory. So that Imagination
and Memory, are but one thing, which for divers considerations hath
divers names.

Much memory, or memory of many things, is called Experience. Againe,
Imagination being only of those things which have been formerly
perceived by Sense, either all at once, or by parts at severall
times; The former, (which is the imagining the whole object, as it was
presented to the sense) is Simple Imagination; as when one imagineth a
man, or horse, which he hath seen before. The other is Compounded; as
when from the sight of a man at one time, and of a horse at another, we
conceive in our mind a Centaure. So when a man compoundeth the image of
his own person, with the image of the actions of an other man; as when a
man imagins himselfe a Hercules, or an Alexander, (which happeneth often
to them that are much taken with reading of Romants) it is a compound
imagination, and properly but a Fiction of the mind. There be also other
Imaginations that rise in men, (though waking) from the great impression
made in sense; As from gazing upon the Sun, the impression leaves an
image of the Sun before our eyes a long time after; and from being long
and vehemently attent upon Geometricall Figures, a man shall in the
dark, (though awake) have the Images of Lines, and Angles before his
eyes: which kind of Fancy hath no particular name; as being a thing that
doth not commonly fall into mens discourse.




Dreams

The imaginations of them that sleep, are those we call Dreams. And these
also (as all other Imaginations) have been before, either totally, or
by parcells in the Sense. And because in sense, the Brain, and Nerves,
which are the necessary Organs of sense, are so benummed in sleep, as
not easily to be moved by the action of Externall Objects, there can
happen in sleep, no Imagination; and therefore no Dreame, but what
proceeds from the agitation of the inward parts of mans body; which
inward parts, for the connexion they have with the Brayn, and other
Organs, when they be distempered, do keep the same in motion; whereby
the Imaginations there formerly made, appeare as if a man were waking;
saving that the Organs of Sense being now benummed, so as there is
no new object, which can master and obscure them with a more vigorous
impression, a Dreame must needs be more cleare, in this silence of
sense, than are our waking thoughts. And hence it cometh to pass, that
it is a hard matter, and by many thought impossible to distinguish
exactly between Sense and Dreaming. For my part, when I consider, that
in Dreames, I do not often, nor constantly think of the same Persons,
Places, Objects, and Actions that I do waking; nor remember so long a
trayne of coherent thoughts, Dreaming, as at other times; And because
waking I often observe the absurdity of Dreames, but never dream of
the absurdities of my waking Thoughts; I am well satisfied, that being
awake, I know I dreame not; though when I dreame, I think my selfe
awake.

And seeing dreames are caused by the distemper of some of the inward
parts of the Body; divers distempers must needs cause different Dreams.
And hence it is, that lying cold breedeth Dreams of Feare, and raiseth
the thought and Image of some fearfull object (the motion from the
brain to the inner parts, and from the inner parts to the Brain being
reciprocall:) and that as Anger causeth heat in some parts of the Body,
when we are awake; so when we sleep, the over heating of the same parts
causeth Anger, and raiseth up in the brain the Imagination of an Enemy.
In the same manner; as naturall kindness, when we are awake causeth
desire; and desire makes heat in certain other parts of the body; so
also, too much heat in those parts, while wee sleep, raiseth in the
brain an imagination of some kindness shewn. In summe, our Dreams are
the reverse of our waking Imaginations; The motion when we are awake,
beginning at one end; and when we Dream, at another.




Apparitions Or Visions

The most difficult discerning of a mans Dream, from his waking thoughts,
is then, when by some accident we observe not that we have slept:
which is easie to happen to a man full of fearfull thoughts; and
whose conscience is much troubled; and that sleepeth, without the
circumstances, of going to bed, or putting off his clothes, as one that
noddeth in a chayre. For he that taketh pains, and industriously layes
himselfe to sleep, in case any uncouth and exorbitant fancy come unto
him, cannot easily think it other than a Dream. We read of Marcus
Brutes, (one that had his life given him by Julius Caesar, and was also
his favorite, and notwithstanding murthered him,) how at Phillipi,
the night before he gave battell to Augustus Caesar, he saw a fearfull
apparition, which is commonly related by Historians as a Vision: but
considering the circumstances, one may easily judge to have been but
a short Dream. For sitting in his tent, pensive and troubled with the
horrour of his rash act, it was not hard for him, slumbering in the
cold, to dream of that which most affrighted him; which feare, as by
degrees it made him wake; so also it must needs make the Apparition by
degrees to vanish: And having no assurance that he slept, he could have
no cause to think it a Dream, or any thing but a Vision. And this is no
very rare Accident: for even they that be perfectly awake, if they be
timorous, and supperstitious, possessed with fearfull tales, and alone
in the dark, are subject to the like fancies, and believe they see
spirits and dead mens Ghosts walking in Churchyards; whereas it is
either their Fancy onely, or els the knavery of such persons, as make
use of such superstitious feare, to pass disguised in the night, to
places they would not be known to haunt.

From this ignorance of how to distinguish Dreams, and other strong
Fancies, from vision and Sense, did arise the greatest part of the
Religion of the Gentiles in time past, that worshipped Satyres, Fawnes,
nymphs, and the like; and now adayes the opinion than rude people have
of Fayries, Ghosts, and Goblins; and of the power of Witches. For as for
Witches, I think not that their witch craft is any reall power; but yet
that they are justly punished, for the false beliefe they have, that
they can do such mischiefe, joyned with their purpose to do it if they
can; their trade being neerer to a new Religion, than to a Craft or
Science. And for Fayries, and walking Ghosts, the opinion of them has I
think been on purpose, either taught, or not confuted, to keep in
credit the use of Exorcisme, of Crosses, of holy Water, and other such
inventions of Ghostly men. Neverthelesse, there is no doubt, but God can
make unnaturall Apparitions. But that he does it so often, as men need
to feare such things, more than they feare the stay, or change, of the
course of Nature, which he also can stay, and change, is no point of
Christian faith. But evill men under pretext that God can do any thing,
are so bold as to say any thing when it serves their turn, though
they think it untrue; It is the part of a wise man, to believe them no
further, than right reason makes that which they say, appear credible.
If this superstitious fear of Spirits were taken away, and with it,
Prognostiques from Dreams, false Prophecies, and many other things
depending thereon, by which, crafty ambitious persons abuse the
simple people, men would be much more fitted than they are for civill
Obedience.

And this ought to be the work of the Schooles; but they rather nourish
such doctrine. For (not knowing what Imagination, or the Senses are),
what they receive, they teach: some saying, that Imaginations rise of
themselves, and have no cause: Others that they rise most commonly from
the Will; and that Good thoughts are blown (inspired) into a man, by
God; and evill thoughts by the Divell: or that Good thoughts are powred
(infused) into a man, by God; and evill ones by the Divell. Some say
the Senses receive the Species of things, and deliver them to the
Common-sense; and the Common Sense delivers them over to the Fancy, and
the Fancy to the Memory, and the Memory to the Judgement, like
handing of things from one to another, with many words making nothing
understood.




Understanding

The Imagination that is raysed in man (or any other creature indued with
the faculty of imagining) by words, or other voluntary signes, is that
we generally call Understanding; and is common to Man and Beast. For a
dogge by custome will understand the call, or the rating of his Master;
and so will many other Beasts. That Understanding which is peculiar to
man, is the Understanding not onely his will; but his conceptions and
thoughts, by the sequell and contexture of the names of things into
Affirmations, Negations, and other formes of Speech: And of this kinde
of Understanding I shall speak hereafter.



CHAPTER III. OF THE CONSEQUENCE OR TRAYNE OF IMAGINATIONS


By Consequence, or Trayne of Thoughts, I understand that succession
of one Thought to another, which is called (to distinguish it from
Discourse in words) Mentall Discourse.

When a man thinketh on any thing whatsoever, His next Thought after, is
not altogether so casuall as it seems to be. Not every Thought to every
Thought succeeds indifferently. But as wee have no Imagination, whereof
we have not formerly had Sense, in whole, or in parts; so we have no
Transition from one Imagination to another, whereof we never had the
like before in our Senses. The reason whereof is this. All Fancies
are Motions within us, reliques of those made in the Sense: And those
motions that immediately succeeded one another in the sense, continue
also together after Sense: In so much as the former comming again to
take place, and be praedominant, the later followeth, by coherence of
the matter moved, is such manner, as water upon a plain Table is drawn
which way any one part of it is guided by the finger. But because
in sense, to one and the same thing perceived, sometimes one thing,
sometimes another succeedeth, it comes to passe in time, that in the
Imagining of any thing, there is no certainty what we shall Imagine
next; Onely this is certain, it shall be something that succeeded the
same before, at one time or another.




Trayne Of Thoughts Unguided

This Trayne of Thoughts, or Mentall Discourse, is of two sorts. The
first is Unguided, Without Designee, and inconstant; Wherein there is no
Passionate Thought, to govern and direct those that follow, to it self,
as the end and scope of some desire, or other passion: In which case the
thoughts are said to wander, and seem impertinent one to another, as
in a Dream. Such are Commonly the thoughts of men, that are not onely
without company, but also without care of any thing; though even then
their Thoughts are as busie as at other times, but without harmony; as
the sound which a Lute out of tune would yeeld to any man; or in tune,
to one that could not play. And yet in this wild ranging of the mind,
a man may oft-times perceive the way of it, and the dependance of one
thought upon another. For in a Discourse of our present civill warre,
what could seem more impertinent, than to ask (as one did) what was the
value of a Roman Penny? Yet the Cohaerence to me was manifest enough.
For the Thought of the warre, introduced the Thought of the delivering
up the King to his Enemies; The Thought of that, brought in the Thought
of the delivering up of Christ; and that again the Thought of the 30
pence, which was the price of that treason: and thence easily followed
that malicious question; and all this in a moment of time; for Thought
is quick.




Trayne Of Thoughts Regulated

The second is more constant; as being Regulated by some desire, and
designee. For the impression made by such things as wee desire, or
feare, is strong, and permanent, or, (if it cease for a time,) of quick
return: so strong it is sometimes, as to hinder and break our sleep.
From Desire, ariseth the Thought of some means we have seen produce the
like of that which we ayme at; and from the thought of that, the
thought of means to that mean; and so continually, till we come to some
beginning within our own power. And because the End, by the greatnesse
of the impression, comes often to mind, in case our thoughts begin to
wander, they are quickly again reduced into the way: which observed by
one of the seven wise men, made him give men this praecept, which is
now worne out, Respice Finem; that is to say, in all your actions,
look often upon what you would have, as the thing that directs all your
thoughts in the way to attain it.




Remembrance

The Trayn of regulated Thoughts is of two kinds; One, when of an effect
imagined, wee seek the causes, or means that produce it: and this
is common to Man and Beast. The other is, when imagining any thing
whatsoever, wee seek all the possible effects, that can by it be
produced; that is to say, we imagine what we can do with it, when wee
have it. Of which I have not at any time seen any signe, but in man
onely; for this is a curiosity hardly incident to the nature of any
living creature that has no other Passion but sensuall, such as are
hunger, thirst, lust, and anger. In summe, the Discourse of the Mind,
when it is governed by designee, is nothing but Seeking, or the faculty
of Invention, which the Latines call Sagacitas, and Solertia; a hunting
out of the causes, of some effect, present or past; or of the effects,
of some present or past cause, sometimes a man seeks what he hath lost;
and from that place, and time, wherein hee misses it, his mind runs
back, from place to place, and time to time, to find where, and when
he had it; that is to say, to find some certain, and limited time and
place, in which to begin a method of seeking. Again, from thence, his
thoughts run over the same places and times, to find what action, or
other occasion might make him lose it. This we call Remembrance,
or Calling to mind: the Latines call it Reminiscentia, as it were a
Re-Conning of our former actions.

Sometimes a man knows a place determinate, within the compasse whereof
his is to seek; and then his thoughts run over all the parts thereof,
in the same manner, as one would sweep a room, to find a jewell; or as
a Spaniel ranges the field, till he find a sent; or as a man should run
over the alphabet, to start a rime.




Prudence

Sometime a man desires to know the event of an action; and then he
thinketh of some like action past, and the events thereof one after
another; supposing like events will follow like actions. As he that
foresees what wil become of a Criminal, re-cons what he has seen follow
on the like Crime before; having this order of thoughts, The Crime,
the Officer, the Prison, the Judge, and the Gallowes. Which kind
of thoughts, is called Foresight, and Prudence, or Providence; and
sometimes Wisdome; though such conjecture, through the difficulty of
observing all circumstances, be very fallacious. But this is certain; by
how much one man has more experience of things past, than another; by
so much also he is more Prudent, and his expectations the seldomer faile
him. The Present onely has a being in Nature; things Past have a being
in the Memory onely, but things To Come have no being at all; the Future
being but a fiction of the mind, applying the sequels of actions Past,
to the actions that are Present; which with most certainty is done by
him that has most Experience; but not with certainty enough. And though
it be called Prudence, when the Event answereth our Expectation; yet in
its own nature, it is but Presumption. For the foresight of things to
come, which is Providence, belongs onely to him by whose will they are
to come. From him onely, and supernaturally, proceeds Prophecy. The best
Prophet naturally is the best guesser; and the best guesser, he that is
most versed and studied in the matters he guesses at: for he hath most
Signes to guesse by.




Signes

A Signe, is the Event Antecedent, of the Consequent; and contrarily,
the Consequent of the Antecedent, when the like Consequences have been
observed, before: And the oftner they have been observed, the lesse
uncertain is the Signe. And therefore he that has most experience in
any kind of businesse, has most Signes, whereby to guesse at the Future
time, and consequently is the most prudent: And so much more prudent
than he that is new in that kind of business, as not to be equalled by
any advantage of naturall and extemporary wit: though perhaps many young
men think the contrary.

Neverthelesse it is not Prudence that distinguisheth man from beast.
There be beasts, that at a year old observe more, and pursue that which
is for their good, more prudently, than a child can do at ten.




Conjecture Of The Time Past

As Prudence is a Praesumtion of the Future, contracted from the
Experience of time Past; So there is a Praesumtion of things Past taken
from other things (not future but) past also. For he that hath seen
by what courses and degrees, a flourishing State hath first come into
civill warre, and then to ruine; upon the sights of the ruines of any
other State, will guesse, the like warre, and the like courses have been
there also. But his conjecture, has the same incertainty almost with the
conjecture of the Future; both being grounded onely upon Experience.

There is no other act of mans mind, that I can remember, naturally
planted in him, so, as to need no other thing, to the exercise of it,
but to be born a man, and live with the use of his five Senses. Those
other Faculties, of which I shall speak by and by, and which seem proper
to man onely, are acquired, and encreased by study and industry; and of
most men learned by instruction, and discipline; and proceed all from
the invention of Words, and Speech. For besides Sense, and Thoughts, and
the Trayne of thoughts, the mind of man has no other motion; though by
the help of Speech, and Method, the same Facultyes may be improved to
such a height, as to distinguish men from all other living Creatures.

Whatsoever we imagine, is Finite. Therefore there is no Idea, or
conception of anything we call Infinite. No man can have in his mind an
Image of infinite magnitude; nor conceive the ends, and bounds of
the thing named; having no Conception of the thing, but of our own
inability. And therefore the Name of GOD is used, not to make us
conceive him; (for he is Incomprehensible; and his greatnesse, and power
are unconceivable;) but that we may honour him. Also because whatsoever
(as I said before,) we conceive, has been perceived first by sense,
either all at once, or by parts; a man can have no thought, representing
any thing, not subject to sense. No man therefore can conceive any
thing, but he must conceive it in some place; and indued with some
determinate magnitude; and which may be divided into parts; nor that any
thing is all in this place, and all in another place at the same time;
nor that two, or more things can be in one, and the same place at once:
for none of these things ever have, or can be incident to Sense; but are
absurd speeches, taken upon credit (without any signification at all,)
from deceived Philosophers, and deceived, or deceiving Schoolemen.



CHAPTER IV. OF SPEECH




Originall Of Speech

The Invention of Printing, though ingenious, compared with the invention
of Letters, is no great matter. But who was the first that found the use
of Letters, is not known. He that first brought them into Greece, men
say was Cadmus, the sonne of Agenor, King of Phaenicia. A profitable
Invention for continuing the memory of time past, and the conjunction of
mankind, dispersed into so many, and distant regions of the Earth; and
with all difficult, as proceeding from a watchfull observation of the
divers motions of the Tongue, Palat, Lips, and other organs of Speech;
whereby to make as many differences of characters, to remember them.
But the most noble and profitable invention of all other, was that of
Speech, consisting of Names or Apellations, and their Connexion; whereby
men register their Thoughts; recall them when they are past; and also
declare them one to another for mutuall utility and conversation;
without which, there had been amongst men, neither Common-wealth, nor
Society, nor Contract, nor Peace, no more than amongst Lyons, Bears,
and Wolves. The first author of Speech was GOD himselfe, that instructed
Adam how to name such creatures as he presented to his sight; For the
Scripture goeth no further in this matter. But this was sufficient
to direct him to adde more names, as the experience and use of the
creatures should give him occasion; and to joyn them in such manner by
degrees, as to make himselfe understood; and so by succession of time,
so much language might be gotten, as he had found use for; though not so
copious, as an Orator or Philosopher has need of. For I do not find any
thing in the Scripture, out of which, directly or by consequence can
be gathered, that Adam was taught the names of all Figures, Numbers,
Measures, Colours, Sounds, Fancies, Relations; much less the names
of Words and Speech, as Generall, Speciall, Affirmative, Negative,
Interrogative, Optative, Infinitive, all which are usefull; and least of
all, of Entity, Intentionality, Quiddity, and other significant words of
the School.

But all this language gotten, and augmented by Adam and his posterity,
was again lost at the tower of Babel, when by the hand of God, every man
was stricken for his rebellion, with an oblivion of his former language.
And being hereby forced to disperse themselves into severall parts of
the world, it must needs be, that the diversity of Tongues that now is,
proceeded by degrees from them, in such manner, as need (the mother of
all inventions) taught them; and in tract of time grew every where more
copious.




The Use Of Speech

The generall use of Speech, is to transferre our Mentall Discourse, into
Verbal; or the Trayne of our Thoughts, into a Trayne of Words; and that
for two commodities; whereof one is, the Registring of the Consequences
of our Thoughts; which being apt to slip out of our memory, and put
us to a new labour, may again be recalled, by such words as they were
marked by. So that the first use of names, is to serve for Markes,
or Notes of remembrance. Another is, when many use the same words,
to signifie (by their connexion and order,) one to another, what they
conceive, or think of each matter; and also what they desire, feare,
or have any other passion for, and for this use they are called
Signes. Speciall uses of Speech are these; First, to Register, what by
cogitation, wee find to be the cause of any thing, present or past; and
what we find things present or past may produce, or effect: which in
summe, is acquiring of Arts. Secondly, to shew to others that knowledge
which we have attained; which is, to Counsell, and Teach one another.
Thirdly, to make known to others our wills, and purposes, that we may
have the mutuall help of one another. Fourthly, to please and delight
our selves, and others, by playing with our words, for pleasure or
ornament, innocently.




Abuses Of Speech

To these Uses, there are also foure correspondent Abuses. First,
when men register their thoughts wrong, by the inconstancy of the
signification of their words; by which they register for their
conceptions, that which they never conceived; and so deceive themselves.
Secondly, when they use words metaphorically; that is, in other sense
than that they are ordained for; and thereby deceive others. Thirdly,
when by words they declare that to be their will, which is not.
Fourthly, when they use them to grieve one another: for seeing nature
hath armed living creatures, some with teeth, some with horns, and some
with hands, to grieve an enemy, it is but an abuse of Speech, to grieve
him with the tongue, unlesse it be one whom wee are obliged to govern;
and then it is not to grieve, but to correct and amend.

The manner how Speech serveth to the remembrance of the consequence
of causes and effects, consisteth in the imposing of Names, and the
Connexion of them.




Names Proper & Common Universall

Of Names, some are Proper, and singular to one onely thing; as Peter,
John, This Man, This Tree: and some are Common to many things; as Man,
Horse, Tree; every of which though but one Name, is nevertheless the
name of divers particular things; in respect of all which together, it
is called an Universall; there being nothing in the world Universall
but Names; for the things named, are every one of them Individual and
Singular.

One Universall name is imposed on many things, for their similitude in
some quality, or other accident: And whereas a Proper Name bringeth to
mind one thing onely; Universals recall any one of those many.

And of Names Universall, some are of more, and some of lesse extent; the
larger comprehending the lesse large: and some again of equall extent,
comprehending each other reciprocally. As for example, the Name Body is
of larger signification than the word Man, and conprehendeth it; and the
names Man and Rationall, are of equall extent, comprehending mutually
one another. But here wee must take notice, that by a Name is not
alwayes understood, as in Grammar, one onely word; but sometimes by
circumlocution many words together. For all these words, Hee That In
His Actions Observeth The Lawes Of His Country, make but one Name,
equivalent to this one word, Just.

By this imposition of Names, some of larger, some of stricter
signification, we turn the reckoning of the consequences of things
imagined in the mind, into a reckoning of the consequences of
Appellations. For example, a man that hath no use of Speech at all,
(such, as is born and remains perfectly deafe and dumb,) if he set
before his eyes a triangle, and by it two right angles, (such as are the
corners of a square figure,) he may by meditation compare and find, that
the three angles of that triangle, are equall to those two right angles
that stand by it. But if another triangle be shewn him different in
shape from the former, he cannot know without a new labour, whether the
three angles of that also be equall to the same. But he that hath the
use of words, when he observes, that such equality was consequent, not
to the length of the sides, nor to any other particular thing in his
triangle; but onely to this, that the sides were straight, and the
angles three; and that that was all, for which he named it a Triangle;
will boldly conclude Universally, that such equality of angles is in
all triangles whatsoever; and register his invention in these generall
termes, Every Triangle Hath Its Three Angles Equall To Two Right Angles.
And thus the consequence found in one particular, comes to be registred
and remembred, as a Universall rule; and discharges our mentall
reckoning, of time and place; and delivers us from all labour of the
mind, saving the first; and makes that which was found true Here, and
Now, to be true in All Times and Places.

But the use of words in registring our thoughts, is in nothing so
evident as in Numbering. A naturall foole that could never learn by
heart the order of numerall words, as One, Two, and Three, may observe
every stroak of the Clock, and nod to it, or say one, one, one; but can
never know what houre it strikes. And it seems, there was a time when
those names of number were not in use; and men were fayn to apply their
fingers of one or both hands, to those things they desired to keep
account of; and that thence it proceeded, that now our numerall words
are but ten, in any Nation, and in some but five, and then they begin
again. And he that can tell ten, if he recite them out of order, will
lose himselfe, and not know when he has done: Much lesse will he be
able to add, and substract, and performe all other operations of
Arithmetique. So that without words, there is no possibility of
reckoning of Numbers; much lesse of Magnitudes, of Swiftnesse, of Force,
and other things, the reckonings whereof are necessary to the being, or
well-being of man-kind.

When two Names are joyned together into a Consequence, or Affirmation;
as thus, A Man Is A Living Creature; or thus, If He Be A Man, He Is A
Living Creature, If the later name Living Creature, signifie all that
the former name Man signifieth, then the affirmation, or consequence is
True; otherwise False. For True and False are attributes of Speech, not
of things. And where Speech in not, there is neither Truth nor Falshood.
Errour there may be, as when wee expect that which shall not be; or
suspect what has not been: but in neither case can a man be charged with
Untruth.

Seeing then that Truth consisteth in the right ordering of names in our
affirmations, a man that seeketh precise Truth, had need to remember
what every name he uses stands for; and to place it accordingly; or els
he will find himselfe entangled in words, as a bird in lime-twiggs; the
more he struggles, the more belimed. And therefore in Geometry, (which
is the onely Science that it hath pleased God hitherto to bestow on
mankind,) men begin at settling the significations of their words; which
settling of significations, they call Definitions; and place them in the
beginning of their reckoning.

By this it appears how necessary it is for any man that aspires to true
Knowledge, to examine the Definitions of former Authors; and either
to correct them, where they are negligently set down; or to make them
himselfe. For the errours of Definitions multiply themselves, according
as the reckoning proceeds; and lead men into absurdities, which at last
they see, but cannot avoyd, without reckoning anew from the beginning;
in which lyes the foundation of their errours. From whence it happens,
that they which trust to books, do as they that cast up many little
summs into a greater, without considering whether those little summes
were rightly cast up or not; and at last finding the errour visible,
and not mistrusting their first grounds, know not which way to cleere
themselves; but spend time in fluttering over their bookes; as birds
that entring by the chimney, and finding themselves inclosed in a
chamber, flitter at the false light of a glasse window, for want of wit
to consider which way they came in. So that in the right Definition
of Names, lyes the first use of Speech; which is the Acquisition of
Science: And in wrong, or no Definitions’ lyes the first abuse; from
which proceed all false and senslesse Tenets; which make those men that
take their instruction from the authority of books, and not from their
own meditation, to be as much below the condition of ignorant men, as
men endued with true Science are above it. For between true Science,
and erroneous Doctrines, Ignorance is in the middle. Naturall sense and
imagination, are not subject to absurdity. Nature it selfe cannot erre:
and as men abound in copiousnesse of language; so they become more wise,
or more mad than ordinary. Nor is it possible without Letters for any
man to become either excellently wise, or (unless his memory be hurt by
disease, or ill constitution of organs) excellently foolish. For words
are wise mens counters, they do but reckon by them: but they are the
mony of fooles, that value them by the authority of an Aristotle, a
Cicero, or a Thomas, or any other Doctor whatsoever, if but a man.




Subject To Names

Subject To Names, is whatsoever can enter into, or be considered in an
account; and be added one to another to make a summe; or substracted one
from another, and leave a remainder. The Latines called Accounts of mony
Rationes, and accounting, Ratiocinatio: and that which we in bills or
books of account call Items, they called Nomina; that is, Names: and
thence it seems to proceed, that they extended the word Ratio, to the
faculty of Reckoning in all other things. The Greeks have but one word
Logos, for both Speech and Reason; not that they thought there was no
Speech without Reason; but no Reasoning without Speech: And the act of
reasoning they called syllogisme; which signifieth summing up of the
consequences of one saying to another. And because the same things may
enter into account for divers accidents; their names are (to shew that
diversity) diversly wrested, and diversified. This diversity of names
may be reduced to foure generall heads.

First, a thing may enter into account for Matter, or Body; as Living,
Sensible, Rationall, Hot, Cold, Moved, Quiet; with all which names the
word Matter, or Body is understood; all such, being names of Matter.

Secondly, it may enter into account, or be considered, for some accident
or quality, which we conceive to be in it; as for Being Moved, for Being
So Long, for Being Hot, &c; and then, of the name of the thing it selfe,
by a little change or wresting, wee make a name for that accident, which
we consider; and for Living put into account Life; for Moved, Motion;
for Hot, Heat; for Long, Length, and the like. And all such Names, are
the names of the accidents and properties, by which one Matter, and Body
is distinguished from another. These are called Names Abstract; Because
Severed (not from Matter, but) from the account of Matter.

Thirdly, we bring into account, the Properties of our own bodies,
whereby we make such distinction: as when any thing is Seen by us, we
reckon not the thing it selfe; but the Sight, the Colour, the Idea of
it in the fancy: and when any thing is Heard, wee reckon it not; but the
Hearing, or Sound onely, which is our fancy or conception of it by the
Eare: and such are names of fancies.

Fourthly, we bring into account, consider, and give names, to Names
themselves, and to Speeches: For, Generall, Universall, Speciall,
Oequivocall, are names of Names. And Affirmation, Interrogation,
Commandement, Narration, Syllogisme, Sermon, Oration, and many other
such, are names of Speeches.




Use Of Names Positive

And this is all the variety of Names Positive; which are put to mark
somewhat which is in Nature, or may be feigned by the mind of man, as
Bodies that are, or may be conceived to be; or of bodies, the Properties
that are, or may be feigned to be; or Words and Speech.




Negative Names With Their Uses

There be also other Names, called Negative; which are notes to signifie
that a word is not the name of the thing in question; as these words
Nothing, No Man, Infinite, Indocible, Three Want Foure, and the
like; which are nevertheless of use in reckoning, or in correcting of
reckoning; and call to mind our past cogitations, though they be not
names of any thing; because they make us refuse to admit of Names not
rightly used.




Words Insignificant

All other names, are but insignificant sounds; and those of two
sorts. One, when they are new, and yet their meaning not explained by
Definition; whereof there have been aboundance coyned by Schoole-men,
and pusled Philosophers.

Another, when men make a name of two Names, whose significations are
contradictory and inconsistent; as this name, an Incorporeall Body, or
(which is all one) an Incorporeall Substance, and a great number more.
For whensoever any affirmation is false, the two names of which it
is composed, put together and made one, signifie nothing at all. For
example if it be a false affirmation to say A Quadrangle Is Round,
the word Round Quadrangle signifies nothing; but is a meere sound. So
likewise if it be false, to say that vertue can be powred, or blown up
and down; the words In-powred Vertue, In-blown Vertue, are as absurd
and insignificant, as a Round Quadrangle. And therefore you shall hardly
meet with a senselesse and insignificant word, that is not made up of
some Latin or Greek names. A Frenchman seldome hears our Saviour called
by the name of Parole, but by the name of Verbe often; yet Verbe and
Parole differ no more, but that one is Latin, the other French.




Understanding

When a man upon the hearing of any Speech, hath those thoughts which the
words of that Speech, and their connexion, were ordained and constituted
to signifie; Then he is said to understand it; Understanding being
nothing els, but conception caused by Speech. And therefore if Speech
be peculiar to man (as for ought I know it is,) then is Understanding
peculiar to him also. And therefore of absurd and false affirmations,
in case they be universall, there can be no Understanding; though many
think they understand, then, when they do but repeat the words softly,
or con them in their mind.

What kinds of Speeches signifie the Appetites, Aversions, and Passions
of mans mind; and of their use and abuse, I shall speak when I have
spoken of the Passions.




Inconstant Names

The names of such things as affect us, that is, which please, and
displease us, because all men be not alike affected with the same thing,
nor the same man at all times, are in the common discourses of men, of
Inconstant signification. For seeing all names are imposed to signifie
our conceptions; and all our affections are but conceptions; when we
conceive the same things differently, we can hardly avoyd different
naming of them. For though the nature of that we conceive, be the
same; yet the diversity of our reception of it, in respect of different
constitutions of body, and prejudices of opinion, gives everything a
tincture of our different passions. And therefore in reasoning, a man
bust take heed of words; which besides the signification of what we
imagine of their nature, disposition, and interest of the speaker; such
as are the names of Vertues, and Vices; For one man calleth Wisdome,
what another calleth Feare; and one Cruelty, what another Justice;
one Prodigality, what another Magnanimity; one Gravity, what another
Stupidity, &c. And therefore such names can never be true grounds of any
ratiocination. No more can Metaphors, and Tropes of speech: but these
are less dangerous, because they profess their inconstancy; which the
other do not.



CHAPTER V. OF REASON, AND SCIENCE.




Reason What It Is

When a man Reasoneth, hee does nothing els but conceive a summe totall,
from Addition of parcels; or conceive a Remainder, from Substraction of
one summe from another: which (if it be done by Words,) is conceiving of
the consequence of the names of all the parts, to the name of the whole;
or from the names of the whole and one part, to the name of the other
part. And though in some things, (as in numbers,) besides Adding and
Substracting, men name other operations, as Multiplying and Dividing;
yet they are the same; for Multiplication, is but Addition together of
things equall; and Division, but Substracting of one thing, as often as
we can. These operations are not incident to Numbers onely, but to
all manner of things that can be added together, and taken one out of
another. For as Arithmeticians teach to adde and substract in Numbers;
so the Geometricians teach the same in Lines, Figures (solid and
superficiall,) Angles, Proportions, Times, degrees of Swiftnesse, Force,
Power, and the like; The Logicians teach the same in Consequences
Of Words; adding together Two Names, to make an Affirmation; and Two
Affirmations, to make a syllogisme; and Many syllogismes to make a
Demonstration; and from the Summe, or Conclusion of a syllogisme, they
substract one Proposition, to finde the other. Writers of Politiques,
adde together Pactions, to find mens Duties; and Lawyers, Lawes and
Facts, to find what is Right and Wrong in the actions of private men.
In summe, in what matter soever there is place for Addition and
Substraction, there also is place for Reason; and where these have no
place, there Reason has nothing at all to do.




Reason Defined

Out of all which we may define, (that is to say determine,) what that
is, which is meant by this word Reason, when wee reckon it amongst
the Faculties of the mind. For Reason, in this sense, is nothing but
Reckoning (that is, Adding and Substracting) of the Consequences of
generall names agreed upon, for the Marking and Signifying of our
thoughts; I say Marking them, when we reckon by our selves; and
Signifying, when we demonstrate, or approve our reckonings to other men.




Right Reason Where

And as in Arithmetique, unpractised men must, and Professors themselves
may often erre, and cast up false; so also in any other subject of
Reasoning, the ablest, most attentive, and most practised men, may
deceive themselves, and inferre false Conclusions; Not but that Reason
it selfe is always Right Reason, as well as Arithmetique is a certain
and infallible art: But no one mans Reason, nor the Reason of any
one number of men, makes the certaintie; no more than an account is
therefore well cast up, because a great many men have unanimously
approved it. And therfore, as when there is a controversy in an account,
the parties must by their own accord, set up for right Reason, the
Reason of some Arbitrator, or Judge, to whose sentence they will
both stand, or their controversie must either come to blowes, or be
undecided, for want of a right Reason constituted by Nature; so is
it also in all debates of what kind soever: And when men that think
themselves wiser than all others, clamor and demand right Reason for
judge; yet seek no more, but that things should be determined, by no
other mens reason but their own, it is as intolerable in the society of
men, as it is in play after trump is turned, to use for trump on every
occasion, that suite whereof they have most in their hand. For they do
nothing els, that will have every of their passions, as it comes to
bear sway in them, to be taken for right Reason, and that in their own
controversies: bewraying their want of right Reason, by the claym they
lay to it.




The Use Of Reason

The Use and End of Reason, is not the finding of the summe, and truth
of one, or a few consequences, remote from the first definitions, and
settled significations of names; but to begin at these; and proceed from
one consequence to another. For there can be no certainty of the last
Conclusion, without a certainty of all those Affirmations and Negations,
on which it was grounded, and inferred. As when a master of a family,
in taking an account, casteth up the summs of all the bills of expence,
into one sum; and not regarding how each bill is summed up, by those
that give them in account; nor what it is he payes for; he advantages
himselfe no more, than if he allowed the account in grosse, trusting to
every of the accountants skill and honesty; so also in Reasoning of all
other things, he that takes up conclusions on the trust of Authors, and
doth not fetch them from the first Items in every Reckoning, (which are
the significations of names settled by definitions), loses his labour;
and does not know any thing; but onely beleeveth.




Of Error And Absurdity

When a man reckons without the use of words, which may be done in
particular things, (as when upon the sight of any one thing, wee
conjecture what was likely to have preceded, or is likely to follow upon
it;) if that which he thought likely to follow, followes not; or that
which he thought likely to have preceded it, hath not preceded it, this
is called ERROR; to which even the most prudent men are subject. But
when we Reason in Words of generall signification, and fall upon a
generall inference which is false; though it be commonly called Error,
it is indeed an ABSURDITY, or senseless Speech. For Error is but a
deception, in presuming that somewhat is past, or to come; of which,
though it were not past, or not to come; yet there was no impossibility
discoverable. But when we make a generall assertion, unlesse it be a
true one, the possibility of it is unconceivable. And words whereby we
conceive nothing but the sound, are those we call Absurd, insignificant,
and Non-sense. And therefore if a man should talk to me of a Round
Quadrangle; or Accidents Of Bread In Cheese; or Immaterial Substances;
or of A Free Subject; A Free Will; or any Free, but free from being
hindred by opposition, I should not say he were in an Errour; but that
his words were without meaning; that is to say, Absurd.

I have said before, (in the second chapter,) that a Man did excell
all other Animals in this faculty, that when he conceived any thing
whatsoever, he was apt to enquire the consequences of it, and what
effects he could do with it. And now I adde this other degree of the
same excellence, that he can by words reduce the consequences he findes
to generall Rules, called Theoremes, or Aphorismes; that is, he can
Reason, or reckon, not onely in number; but in all other things, whereof
one may be added unto, or substracted from another.

But this priviledge, is allayed by another; and that is, by the
priviledge of Absurdity; to which no living creature is subject, but man
onely. And of men, those are of all most subject to it, that professe
Philosophy. For it is most true that Cicero sayth of them somewhere;
that there can be nothing so absurd, but may be found in the books of
Philosophers. And the reason is manifest. For there is not one of them
that begins his ratiocination from the Definitions, or Explications of
the names they are to use; which is a method that hath been used onely
in Geometry; whose Conclusions have thereby been made indisputable.




Causes Of Absurditie

The first cause of Absurd conclusions I ascribe to the want of Method;
in that they begin not their Ratiocination from Definitions; that
is, from settled significations of their words: as if they could cast
account, without knowing the value of the numerall words, One, Two, and
Three.

And whereas all bodies enter into account upon divers considerations,
(which I have mentioned in the precedent chapter;) these considerations
being diversly named, divers absurdities proceed from the confusion, and
unfit connexion of their names into assertions. And therefore

The second cause of Absurd assertions, I ascribe to the giving of names
of Bodies, to Accidents; or of Accidents, to Bodies; As they do, that
say, Faith Is Infused, or Inspired; when nothing can be Powred, or
Breathed into any thing, but body; and that, Extension is Body; that
Phantasmes are Spirits, &c.

The third I ascribe to the giving of the names of the Accidents of
Bodies Without Us, to the Accidents of our Own Bodies; as they do that
say, the Colour Is In The Body; The Sound Is In The Ayre, &c.

The fourth, to the giving of the names of Bodies, to Names, or Speeches;
as they do that say, that There Be Things Universall; that A Living
Creature Is Genus, or A Generall Thing, &c.

The fifth, to the giving of the names of Accidents, to Names and
Speeches; as they do that say, The Nature Of A Thing Is In Its
Definition; A Mans Command Is His Will; and the like.

The sixth, to the use of Metaphors, Tropes, and other Rhetoricall
figures, in stead of words proper. For though it be lawfull to say, (for
example) in common speech, The Way Goeth, Or Leadeth Hither, Or Thither,
The Proverb Sayes This Or That (whereas wayes cannot go, nor Proverbs
speak;) yet in reckoning, and seeking of truth, such speeches are not to
be admitted.

The seventh, to names that signifie nothing; but are taken up, and
learned by rote from the Schooles, as Hypostatical, Transubstantiate,
Consubstantiate, Eternal-now, and the like canting of Schoole-men.

To him that can avoyd these things, it is not easie to fall into any
absurdity, unlesse it be by the length of an account; wherein he may
perhaps forget what went before. For all men by nature reason alike, and
well, when they have good principles. For who is so stupid, as both to
mistake in Geometry, and also to persist in it, when another detects his
error to him?




Science

By this it appears that Reason is not as Sense, and Memory, borne with
us; nor gotten by Experience onely; as Prudence is; but attayned by
Industry; first in apt imposing of Names; and secondly by getting a good
and orderly Method in proceeding from the Elements, which are Names,
to Assertions made by Connexion of one of them to another; and so to
syllogismes, which are the Connexions of one Assertion to another, till
we come to a knowledge of all the Consequences of names appertaining to
the subject in hand; and that is it, men call SCIENCE. And whereas
Sense and Memory are but knowledge of Fact, which is a thing past, and
irrevocable; Science is the knowledge of Consequences, and dependance
of one fact upon another: by which, out of that we can presently do, we
know how to do something els when we will, or the like, another time;
Because when we see how any thing comes about, upon what causes, and by
what manner; when the like causes come into our power, wee see how to
make it produce the like effects.

Children therefore are not endued with Reason at all, till they have
attained the use of Speech: but are called Reasonable Creatures, for the
possibility apparent of having the use of Reason in time to come. And
the most part of men, though they have the use of Reasoning a little
way, as in numbring to some degree; yet it serves them to little use in
common life; in which they govern themselves, some better, some worse,
according to their differences of experience, quicknesse of memory, and
inclinations to severall ends; but specially according to good or evill
fortune, and the errors of one another. For as for Science, or certain
rules of their actions, they are so farre from it, that they know
not what it is. Geometry they have thought Conjuring: but for other
Sciences, they who have not been taught the beginnings, and some
progresse in them, that they may see how they be acquired and generated,
are in this point like children, that having no thought of generation,
are made believe by the women, that their brothers and sisters are not
born, but found in the garden.

But yet they that have no Science, are in better, and nobler condition
with their naturall Prudence; than men, that by mis-reasoning, or by
trusting them that reason wrong, fall upon false and absurd generall
rules. For ignorance of causes, and of rules, does not set men so farre
out of their way, as relying on false rules, and taking for causes of
what they aspire to, those that are not so, but rather causes of the
contrary.

To conclude, The Light of humane minds is Perspicuous Words, but by
exact definitions first snuffed, and purged from ambiguity; Reason is
the Pace; Encrease of Science, the Way; and the Benefit of man-kind, the
End. And on the contrary, Metaphors, and senslesse and ambiguous words,
are like Ignes Fatui; and reasoning upon them, is wandering amongst
innumerable absurdities; and their end, contention, and sedition, or
contempt.




Prudence & Sapience, With Their Difference

As, much Experience, is Prudence; so, is much Science, Sapience. For
though wee usually have one name of Wisedome for them both; yet
the Latines did always distinguish between Prudentia and Sapientia,
ascribing the former to Experience, the later to Science. But to make
their difference appeare more cleerly, let us suppose one man endued
with an excellent naturall use, and dexterity in handling his armes; and
another to have added to that dexterity, an acquired Science, of where
he can offend, or be offended by his adversarie, in every possible
posture, or guard: The ability of the former, would be to the ability
of the later, as Prudence to Sapience; both usefull; but the later
infallible. But they that trusting onely to the authority of books,
follow the blind blindly, are like him that trusting to the false rules
of the master of fence, ventures praesumptuously upon an adversary, that
either kills, or disgraces him.




Signes Of Science

The signes of Science, are some, certain and infallible; some,
uncertain. Certain, when he that pretendeth the Science of any thing,
can teach the same; that is to say, demonstrate the truth thereof
perspicuously to another: Uncertain, when onely some particular events
answer to his pretence, and upon many occasions prove so as he sayes
they must. Signes of prudence are all uncertain; because to observe by
experience, and remember all circumstances that may alter the successe,
is impossible. But in any businesse, whereof a man has not infallible
Science to proceed by; to forsake his own natural judgement, and be
guided by generall sentences read in Authors, and subject to many
exceptions, is a signe of folly, and generally scorned by the name of
Pedantry. And even of those men themselves, that in Councells of the
Common-wealth, love to shew their reading of Politiques and History,
very few do it in their domestique affaires, where their particular
interest is concerned; having Prudence enough for their private
affaires: but in publique they study more the reputation of their owne
wit, than the successe of anothers businesse.



CHAPTER VI. OF THE INTERIOUR BEGINNINGS OF VOLUNTARY MOTIONS

COMMONLY CALLED THE PASSIONS. AND THE SPEECHES BY WHICH THEY ARE
EXPRESSED.




Motion Vitall And Animal

There be in Animals, two sorts of Motions peculiar to them: One called
Vitall; begun in generation, and continued without interruption through
their whole life; such as are the Course of the Bloud, the Pulse, the
Breathing, the Concoctions, Nutrition, Excretion, &c; to which Motions
there needs no help of Imagination: The other in Animal Motion,
otherwise called Voluntary Motion; as to Go, to Speak, to Move any of
our limbes, in such manner as is first fancied in our minds. That Sense,
is Motion in the organs and interiour parts of mans body, caused by
the action of the things we See, Heare, &c.; And that Fancy is but the
Reliques of the same Motion, remaining after Sense, has been already
sayd in the first and second Chapters. And because Going, Speaking, and
the like Voluntary motions, depend alwayes upon a precedent thought of
Whither, Which Way, and What; it is evident, that the Imagination is
the first internall beginning of all Voluntary Motion. And although
unstudied men, doe not conceive any motion at all to be there, where
the thing moved is invisible; or the space it is moved in, is (for the
shortnesse of it) insensible; yet that doth not hinder, but that such
Motions are. For let a space be never so little, that which is moved
over a greater space, whereof that little one is part, must first be
moved over that. These small beginnings of Motion, within the body
of Man, before they appear in walking, speaking, striking, and other
visible actions, are commonly called ENDEAVOUR.




Endeavour; Appetite; Desire; Hunger; Thirst; Aversion

This Endeavour, when it is toward something which causes it, is called
APPETITE, or DESIRE; the later, being the generall name; and the other,
oftentimes restrayned to signifie the Desire of Food, namely Hunger and
Thirst. And when the Endeavour is fromward something, it is generally
called AVERSION. These words Appetite, and Aversion we have from the
Latines; and they both of them signifie the motions, one of approaching,
the other of retiring. So also do the Greek words for the same, which
are orme and aphorme. For nature it selfe does often presse upon men
those truths, which afterwards, when they look for somewhat beyond
Nature, they stumble at. For the Schooles find in meere Appetite to go,
or move, no actuall Motion at all: but because some Motion they must
acknowledge, they call it Metaphoricall Motion; which is but an absurd
speech; for though Words may be called metaphoricall; Bodies, and
Motions cannot.

That which men Desire, they are also sayd to LOVE; and to HATE those
things, for which they have Aversion. So that Desire, and Love, are the
same thing; save that by Desire, we alwayes signifie the Absence of
the object; by Love, most commonly the Presence of the same. So also
by Aversion, we signifie the Absence; and by Hate, the Presence of the
Object.

Of Appetites, and Aversions, some are born with men; as Appetite of
food, Appetite of excretion, and exoneration, (which may also and more
properly be called Aversions, from somewhat they feele in their Bodies;)
and some other Appetites, not many. The rest, which are Appetites of
particular things, proceed from Experience, and triall of their effects
upon themselves, or other men. For of things wee know not at all, or
believe not to be, we can have no further Desire, than to tast and try.
But Aversion wee have for things, not onely which we know have hurt us;
but also that we do not know whether they will hurt us, or not.




Contempt

Those things which we neither Desire, nor Hate, we are said to Contemne:
CONTEMPT being nothing els but an immobility, or contumacy of the Heart,
in resisting the action of certain things; and proceeding from that the
Heart is already moved otherwise, by either more potent objects; or from
want of experience of them.

And because the constitution of a mans Body, is in continuall mutation;
it is impossible that all the same things should alwayes cause in him
the same Appetites, and aversions: much lesse can all men consent, in
the Desire of almost any one and the same Object.




Good Evill

But whatsoever is the object of any mans Appetite or Desire; that is
it, which he for his part calleth Good: And the object of his Hate,
and Aversion, evill; And of his contempt, Vile, and Inconsiderable.
For these words of Good, evill, and Contemptible, are ever used with
relation to the person that useth them: There being nothing simply and
absolutely so; nor any common Rule of Good and evill, to be taken from
the nature of the objects themselves; but from the Person of the man
(where there is no Common-wealth;) or, (in a Common-wealth,) From the
Person that representeth it; or from an Arbitrator or Judge, whom men
disagreeing shall by consent set up, and make his sentence the Rule
thereof.




Pulchrum Turpe; Delightfull Profitable; Unpleasant Unprofitable

The Latine Tongue has two words, whose significations approach to
those of Good and Evill; but are not precisely the same; And those are
Pulchrum and Turpe. Whereof the former signifies that, which by some
apparent signes promiseth Good; and the later, that, which promiseth
evill. But in our Tongue we have not so generall names to expresse them
by. But for Pulchrum, we say in some things, Fayre; in other Beautifull,
or Handsome, or Gallant, or Honourable, or Comely, or Amiable; and
for Turpe, Foule, Deformed, Ugly, Base, Nauseous, and the like, as the
subject shall require; All which words, in their proper places signifie
nothing els, but the Mine, or Countenance, that promiseth Good and
evill. So that of Good there be three kinds; Good in the Promise,
that is Pulchrum; Good in Effect, as the end desired, which is called
Jucundum, Delightfull; and Good as the Means, which is called Utile,
Profitable; and as many of evill: For evill, in Promise, is that
they call Turpe; evill in Effect, and End, is Molestum, Unpleasant,
Troublesome; and evill in the Means, Inutile, Unprofitable, Hurtfull.




Delight Displeasure

As, in Sense, that which is really within us, is (As I have sayd
before) onely Motion, caused by the action of externall objects, but in
apparence; to the Sight, Light and Colour; to the Eare, Sound; to the
Nostrill, Odour, &c: so, when the action of the same object is continued
from the Eyes, Eares, and other organs to the Heart; the real effect
there is nothing but Motion, or Endeavour; which consisteth in Appetite,
or Aversion, to, or from the object moving. But the apparence, or sense
of that motion, is that wee either call DELIGHT, or TROUBLE OF MIND.




Pleasure Offence

This Motion, which is called Appetite, and for the apparence of it
Delight, and Pleasure, seemeth to be, a corroboration of Vitall motion,
and a help thereunto; and therefore such things as caused Delight, were
not improperly called Jucunda, (A Juvando,) from helping or fortifying;
and the contrary, Molesta, Offensive, from hindering, and troubling the
motion vitall.

Pleasure therefore, (or Delight,) is the apparence, or sense of Good;
and Molestation or Displeasure, the apparence, or sense of evill. And
consequently all Appetite, Desire, and Love, is accompanied with some
Delight more or lesse; and all Hatred, and Aversion, with more or lesse
Displeasure and Offence.




Pleasures Of Sense; Pleasures Of The Mind; Joy Paine Griefe

Of Pleasures, or Delights, some arise from the sense of an object
Present; And those may be called Pleasures Of Sense, (The word Sensuall,
as it is used by those onely that condemn them, having no place till
there be Lawes.) Of this kind are all Onerations and Exonerations of the
body; as also all that is pleasant, in the Sight, Hearing, Smell,
Tast, Or Touch; Others arise from the Expectation, that proceeds from
foresight of the End, or Consequence of things; whether those things in
the Sense Please or Displease: And these are Pleasures Of The Mind of
him that draweth those consequences; and are generally called JOY. In
the like manner, Displeasures, are some in the Sense, and called PAYNE;
others, in the Expectation of consequences, and are called GRIEFE.

These simple Passions called Appetite, Desire, Love, Aversion, Hate,
Joy, and griefe, have their names for divers considerations diversified.
As first, when they one succeed another, they are diversly called from
the opinion men have of the likelihood of attaining what they
desire. Secondly, from the object loved or hated. Thirdly, from the
consideration of many of them together. Fourthly, from the Alteration or
succession it selfe.


Hope-- For Appetite with an opinion of attaining, is called HOPE.

Despaire-- The same, without such opinion, DESPAIRE.

Feare-- Aversion, with opinion of Hurt from the object, FEARE.

Courage-- The same, with hope of avoyding that Hurt by resistance,
COURAGE.

Anger-- Sudden Courage, ANGER.

Confidence-- Constant Hope, CONFIDENCE of our selves.

Diffidence-- Constant Despayre, DIFFIDENCE of our selves.

Indignation-- Anger for great hurt done to another, when we conceive the
same to be done by Injury, INDIGNATION.

Benevolence-- Desire of good to another, BENEVOLENCE, GOOD WILL,
CHARITY. If to man generally, GOOD NATURE.

Covetousnesse-- Desire of Riches, COVETOUSNESSE: a name used alwayes in
signification of blame; because men contending for them, are displeased
with one anothers attaining them; though the desire in it selfe, be to
be blamed, or allowed, according to the means by which those Riches are
sought.

Ambition-- Desire of Office, or precedence, AMBITION: a name used also
in the worse sense, for the reason before mentioned.

Pusillanimity-- Desire of things that conduce but a little to our ends;
And fear of things that are but of little hindrance, PUSILLANIMITY.

Magnanimity-- Contempt of little helps, and hindrances, MAGNANIMITY.

Valour-- Magnanimity, in danger of Death, or Wounds, VALOUR, FORTITUDE.

Liberality-- Magnanimity in the use of Riches, LIBERALITY

Miserablenesse-- Pusillanimity, in the same WRETCHEDNESSE,
MISERABLENESSE; or PARSIMONY; as it is liked or disliked.

Kindnesse-- Love of Persons for society, KINDNESSE.

Naturall Lust-- Love of Persons for Pleasing the sense onely, NATURAL
LUST.

Luxury-- Love of the same, acquired from Rumination, that is Imagination
of Pleasure past, LUXURY.

The Passion Of Love; Jealousie-- Love of one singularly, with desire to
be singularly beloved, THE PASSION OF LOVE. The same, with fear that the
love is not mutuall, JEALOUSIE.

Revengefulnesse-- Desire, by doing hurt to another, to make him condemn
some fact of his own, REVENGEFULNESSE.

Curiosity-- Desire, to know why, and how, CURIOSITY; such as is in no
living creature but Man; so that Man is distinguished, not onely by his
Reason; but also by this singular Passion from other Animals; in whom
the appetite of food, and other pleasures of Sense, by praedominance,
take away the care of knowing causes; which is a Lust of the mind,
that by a perseverance of delight in the continuall and indefatigable
generation of Knowledge, exceedeth the short vehemence of any carnall
Pleasure.

Religion Superstition; True Religion-- Feare of power invisible, feigned
by the mind, or imagined from tales publiquely allowed, RELIGION; not
allowed, superstition. And when the power imagined is truly such as we
imagine, TRUE RELIGION.

Panique Terrour-- Feare, without the apprehension of why, or what,
PANIQUE TERROR; called so from the fables that make Pan the author of
them; whereas in truth there is always in him that so feareth, first,
some apprehension of the cause, though the rest run away by example;
every one supposing his fellow to know why. And therefore this Passion
happens to none but in a throng, or multitude of people.

Admiration-- Joy, from apprehension of novelty, ADMIRATION; proper to
man, because it excites the appetite of knowing the cause.

Glory Vaine-glory-- Joy, arising from imagination of a man’s own power
and ability, is that exultation of the mind which is called GLORYING:
which, if grounded upon the experience of his own former actions, is
the same with Confidence: but if grounded on the flattery of others, or
onely supposed by himselfe, for delight in the consequences of it,
is called VAINE-GLORY: which name is properly given; because a
well-grounded Confidence begetteth attempt; whereas the supposing of
power does not, and is therefore rightly called Vaine.

Dejection-- Griefe, from opinion of want of power, is called dejection
of mind.

The Vaine-glory which consisteth in the feigning or supposing of
abilities in ourselves, which we know are not, is most incident to young
men, and nourished by the Histories or Fictions of Gallant Persons; and
is corrected often times by Age, and Employment.

Sudden Glory Laughter-- Sudden glory, is the passion which maketh those
Grimaces called LAUGHTER; and is caused either by some sudden act of
their own, that pleaseth them; or by the apprehension of some
deformed thing in another, by comparison whereof they suddenly applaud
themselves. And it is incident most to them, that are conscious of the
fewest abilities in themselves; who are forced to keep themselves in
their own favour, by observing the imperfections of other men.
And therefore much Laughter at the defects of others is a signe of
Pusillanimity. For of great minds, one of the proper workes is, to help
and free others from scorn; and compare themselves onely with the most
able.

Sudden Dejection Weeping-- On the contrary, Sudden Dejection is the
passion that causeth WEEPING; and is caused by such accidents, as
suddenly take away some vehement hope, or some prop of their power: and
they are most subject to it, that rely principally on helps externall,
such as are Women, and Children. Therefore, some Weep for the loss of
Friends; Others for their unkindnesse; others for the sudden stop made
to their thoughts of revenge, by Reconciliation. But in all cases, both
Laughter and Weeping, are sudden motions; Custome taking them both away.
For no man Laughs at old jests; or Weeps for an old calamity.

Shame Blushing-- Griefe, for the discovery of some defect of ability
is SHAME, or the passion that discovereth itself in BLUSHING; and
consisteth in the apprehension of some thing dishonourable; and in young
men, is a signe of the love of good reputation; and commendable: in
old men it is a signe of the same; but because it comes too late, not
commendable.

Impudence-- The Contempt of good reputation is called IMPUDENCE.

Pitty-- Griefe, for the calamity of another is PITTY; and ariseth
from the imagination that the like calamity may befall himselfe; and
therefore is called also COMPASSION, and in the phrase of this present
time a FELLOW-FEELING: and therefore for Calamity arriving from
great wickedness, the best men have the least Pitty; and for the same
Calamity, those have least Pitty, that think themselves least obnoxious
to the same.

Cruelty-- Contempt, or little sense of the calamity of others, is that
which men call CRUELTY; proceeding from Security of their own fortune.
For, that any man should take pleasure in other mens’ great harmes,
without other end of his own, I do not conceive it possible.

Emulation Envy-- Griefe, for the success of a Competitor in wealth,
honour, or other good, if it be joyned with Endeavour to enforce our own
abilities to equal or exceed him, is called EMULATION: but joyned with
Endeavour to supplant or hinder a Competitor, ENVIE.

Deliberation-- When in the mind of man, Appetites and Aversions, Hopes
and Feares, concerning one and the same thing, arise alternately; and
divers good and evill consequences of the doing, or omitting the thing
propounded, come successively into our thoughts; so that sometimes we
have an Appetite to it, sometimes an Aversion from it; sometimes Hope to
be able to do it; sometimes Despaire, or Feare to attempt it; the whole
sum of Desires, Aversions, Hopes and Feares, continued till the thing be
either done, or thought impossible, is that we call DELIBERATION.

Therefore of things past, there is no Deliberation; because manifestly
impossible to be changed: nor of things known to be impossible, or
thought so; because men know, or think such Deliberation vaine. But
of things impossible, which we think possible, we may Deliberate; not
knowing it is in vain. And it is called DELIBERATION; because it is a
putting an end to the Liberty we had of doing, or omitting, according to
our own Appetite, or Aversion.

This alternate succession of Appetites, Aversions, Hopes and Feares is
no less in other living Creatures than in Man; and therefore Beasts also
Deliberate.

Every Deliberation is then sayd to End when that whereof they
Deliberate, is either done, or thought impossible; because till then wee
retain the liberty of doing, or omitting, according to our Appetite, or
Aversion.




The Will

In Deliberation, the last Appetite, or Aversion, immediately adhaering
to the action, or to the omission thereof, is that wee call the
WILL; the Act, (not the faculty,) of Willing. And Beasts that have
Deliberation must necessarily also have Will. The Definition of the
Will, given commonly by the Schooles, that it is a Rationall Appetite,
is not good. For if it were, then could there be no Voluntary Act
against Reason. For a Voluntary Act is that, which proceedeth from the
Will, and no other. But if in stead of a Rationall Appetite, we shall
say an Appetite resulting from a precedent Deliberation, then the
Definition is the same that I have given here. Will, therefore, Is The
Last Appetite In Deliberating. And though we say in common Discourse, a
man had a Will once to do a thing, that neverthelesse he forbore to
do; yet that is properly but an Inclination, which makes no Action
Voluntary; because the action depends not of it, but of the last
Inclination, or Appetite. For if the intervenient Appetites make any
action Voluntary, then by the same reason all intervenient Aversions
should make the same action Involuntary; and so one and the same action
should be both Voluntary & Involuntary.

By this it is manifest, that not onely actions that have their beginning
from Covetousness, Ambition, Lust, or other Appetites to the thing
propounded; but also those that have their beginning from Aversion,
or Feare of those consequences that follow the omission, are Voluntary
Actions.




Formes Of Speech, In Passion

The formes of Speech by which the Passions are expressed, are partly the
same, and partly different from those, by which we express our Thoughts.
And first generally all Passions may be expressed Indicatively; as, I
Love, I Feare, I Joy, I Deliberate, I Will, I Command: but some of them
have particular expressions by themselves, which nevertheless are not
affirmations, unless it be when they serve to make other inferences,
besides that of the Passion they proceed from. Deliberation is expressed
Subjunctively; which is a speech proper to signifie suppositions, with
their consequences; as, If This Be Done, Then This Will Follow; and
differs not from the language of Reasoning, save that Reasoning is in
generall words, but Deliberation for the most part is of Particulars.
The language of Desire, and Aversion, is Imperative; as, Do This,
Forbear That; which when the party is obliged to do, or forbear, is
Command; otherwise Prayer; or els Counsell. The language of Vaine-Glory,
of Indignation, Pitty and Revengefulness, Optative: but of the Desire to
know, there is a peculiar expression called Interrogative; as, What Is
It, When Shall It, How Is It Done, and Why So? Other language of the
Passions I find none: for Cursing, Swearing, Reviling, and the like, do
not signifie as Speech; but as the actions of a tongue accustomed.

These forms of Speech, I say, are expressions, or voluntary
significations of our Passions: but certain signes they be not; because
they may be used arbitrarily, whether they that use them, have such
Passions or not. The best signes of Passions present, are either in the
countenance, motions of the body, actions, and ends, or aims, which we
otherwise know the man to have.




Good And Evill Apparent

And because in Deliberation the Appetites and Aversions are raised by
foresight of the good and evill consequences, and sequels of the action
whereof we Deliberate; the good or evill effect thereof dependeth on the
foresight of a long chain of consequences, of which very seldome any man
is able to see to the end. But for so far as a man seeth, if the Good
in those consequences be greater than the evill, the whole chain is that
which Writers call Apparent or Seeming Good. And contrarily, when the
evill exceedeth the good, the whole is Apparent or Seeming Evill: so
that he who hath by Experience, or Reason, the greatest and surest
prospect of Consequences, Deliberates best himself; and is able, when he
will, to give the best counsel unto others.




Felicity

Continual Successe in obtaining those things which a man from time to
time desireth, that is to say, continual prospering, is that men call
FELICITY; I mean the Felicity of this life. For there is no such thing
as perpetual Tranquillity of mind, while we live here; because Life
itself is but Motion, and can never be without Desire, nor without
Feare, no more than without Sense. What kind of Felicity God hath
ordained to them that devoutly honour him, a man shall no sooner know,
than enjoy; being joys, that now are as incomprehensible, as the word of
School-men, Beatifical Vision, is unintelligible.




Praise Magnification

The form of speech whereby men signifie their opinion of the Goodnesse
of anything is PRAISE. That whereby they signifie the power and
greatness of anything is MAGNIFYING. And that whereby they signifie
the opinion they have of a man’s felicity is by the Greeks called
Makarismos, for which we have no name in our tongue. And thus much is
sufficient for the present purpose to have been said of the passions.



CHAPTER VII. OF THE ENDS OR RESOLUTIONS OF DISCOURSE


Of all Discourse, governed by desire of Knowledge, there is at last
an End, either by attaining, or by giving over. And in the chain of
Discourse, wheresoever it be interrupted, there is an End for that time.




Judgement, or Sentence Final; Doubt

If the Discourse be meerly Mentall, it consisteth of thoughts that the
thing will be, and will not be; or that it has been, and has not been,
alternately. So that wheresoever you break off the chayn of a mans
Discourse, you leave him in a Praesumption of It Will Be, or, It Will
Not Be; or it Has Been, or, Has Not Been. All which is Opinion. And that
which is alternate Appetite, in Deliberating concerning Good and Evil,
the same is alternate Opinion in the Enquiry of the truth of Past, and
Future. And as the last Appetite in Deliberation is called the Will, so
the last Opinion in search of the truth of Past, and Future, is called
the JUDGEMENT, or Resolute and Final Sentence of him that Discourseth.
And as the whole chain of Appetites alternate, in the question of Good
or Bad is called Deliberation; so the whole chain of Opinions alternate,
in the question of True, or False is called DOUBT.

No Discourse whatsoever, can End in absolute knowledge of Fact, past, or
to come. For, as for the knowledge of Fact, it is originally, Sense; and
ever after, Memory. And for the knowledge of consequence, which I have
said before is called Science, it is not Absolute, but Conditionall. No
man can know by Discourse, that this, or that, is, has been, or will
be; which is to know absolutely: but onely, that if This be, That is; if
This has been, That has been; if This shall be, That shall be: which
is to know conditionally; and that not the consequence of one thing to
another; but of one name of a thing, to another name of the same thing.




Science Opinion Conscience

And therefore, when the Discourse is put into Speech, and begins with
the Definitions of Words, and proceeds by Connexion of the same into
general Affirmations, and of these again into Syllogismes, the end or
last sum is called the Conclusion; and the thought of the mind by it
signified is that conditional Knowledge, or Knowledge of the consequence
of words, which is commonly called Science. But if the first ground of
such Discourse be not Definitions, or if the Definitions be not rightly
joyned together into Syllogismes, then the End or Conclusion is again
OPINION, namely of the truth of somewhat said, though sometimes in
absurd and senslesse words, without possibility of being understood.
When two, or more men, know of one and the same fact, they are said
to be CONSCIOUS of it one to another; which is as much as to know it
together. And because such are fittest witnesses of the facts of one
another, or of a third, it was, and ever will be reputed a very Evill
act, for any man to speak against his Conscience; or to corrupt or force
another so to do: Insomuch that the plea of Conscience, has been always
hearkened unto very diligently in all times. Afterwards, men made use
of the same word metaphorically, for the knowledge of their own secret
facts, and secret thoughts; and therefore it is Rhetorically said that
the Conscience is a thousand witnesses. And last of all, men, vehemently
in love with their own new opinions, (though never so absurd,) and
obstinately bent to maintain them, gave those their opinions also that
reverenced name of Conscience, as if they would have it seem unlawful,
to change or speak against them; and so pretend to know they are true,
when they know at most but that they think so.




Beliefe Faith

When a mans Discourse beginneth not at Definitions, it beginneth either
at some other contemplation of his own, and then it is still called
Opinion; Or it beginneth at some saying of another, of whose ability to
know the truth, and of whose honesty in not deceiving, he doubteth
not; and then the Discourse is not so much concerning the Thing, as the
Person; And the Resolution is called BELEEFE, and FAITH: Faith, In the
man; Beleefe, both Of the man, and Of the truth of what he sayes. So
then in Beleefe are two opinions; one of the saying of the man; the
other of his vertue. To Have Faith In, or Trust To, or Beleeve A Man,
signifie the same thing; namely, an opinion of the veracity of the man:
But to Beleeve What Is Said, signifieth onely an opinion of the truth
of the saying. But wee are to observe that this Phrase, I Beleeve In;
as also the Latine, Credo In; and the Greek, Pisteno Eis, are never used
but in the writings of Divines. In stead of them, in other writings are
put, I Beleeve Him; I Have Faith In Him; I Rely On Him: and in Latin,
Credo Illi; Fido Illi: and in Greek, Pisteno Anto: and that this
singularity of the Ecclesiastical use of the word hath raised many
disputes about the right object of the Christian Faith.

But by Beleeving In, as it is in the Creed, is meant, not trust in the
Person; but Confession and acknowledgement of the Doctrine. For not
onely Christians, but all manner of men do so believe in God, as to hold
all for truth they heare him say, whether they understand it, or not;
which is all the Faith and trust can possibly be had in any person
whatsoever: But they do not all believe the Doctrine of the Creed.

From whence we may inferre, that when wee believe any saying whatsoever
it be, to be true, from arguments taken, not from the thing it selfe, or
from the principles of naturall Reason, but from the Authority, and
good opinion wee have, of him that hath sayd it; then is the speaker, or
person we believe in, or trust in, and whose word we take, the object of
our Faith; and the Honour done in Believing, is done to him onely. And
consequently, when wee Believe that the Scriptures are the word of God,
having no immediate revelation from God himselfe, our Beleefe, Faith,
and Trust is in the Church; whose word we take, and acquiesce therein.
And they that believe that which a Prophet relates unto them in the
name of God, take the word of the Prophet, do honour to him, and in him
trust, and believe, touching the truth of what he relateth, whether he
be a true, or a false Prophet. And so it is also with all other History.
For if I should not believe all that is written By Historians, of the
glorious acts of Alexander, or Caesar; I do not think the Ghost of
Alexander, or Caesar, had any just cause to be offended; or any body
else, but the Historian. If Livy say the Gods made once a Cow speak, and
we believe it not; wee distrust not God therein, but Livy. So that it is
evident, that whatsoever we believe, upon no other reason, than what is
drawn from authority of men onely, and their writings; whether they be
sent from God or not, is Faith in men onely.



CHAPTER VIII. OF THE VERTUES COMMONLY CALLED INTELLECTUAL; AND THEIR
CONTRARY DEFECTS




Intellectuall Vertue Defined

Vertue generally, in all sorts of subjects, is somewhat that is valued
for eminence; and consisteth in comparison. For if all things
were equally in all men, nothing would be prized. And by Vertues
INTELLECTUALL, are always understood such abilityes of the mind, as men
praise, value, and desire should be in themselves; and go commonly under
the name of a Good Witte; though the same word Witte, be used also, to
distinguish one certain ability from the rest.




Wit, Naturall, Or Acquired

These Vertues are of two sorts; Naturall, and Acquired. By Naturall, I
mean not, that which a man hath from his Birth: for that is nothing else
but Sense; wherein men differ so little one from another, and from brute
Beasts, as it is not to be reckoned amongst Vertues. But I mean, that
Witte, which is gotten by Use onely, and Experience; without Method,
Culture, or Instruction. This NATURALL WITTE, consisteth principally
in two things; Celerity Of Imagining, (that is, swift succession of one
thought to another;) and Steddy Direction to some approved end. On the
Contrary a slow Imagination, maketh that Defect, or fault of the mind,
which is commonly called DULNESSE, Stupidity, and sometimes by other
names that signifie slownesse of motion, or difficulty to be moved.




Good Wit, Or Fancy; Good Judgement; Discretion

And this difference of quicknesse, is caused by the difference of mens
passions; that love and dislike, some one thing, some another: and
therefore some mens thoughts run one way, some another: and are held to,
and observe differently the things that passe through their imagination.
And whereas in his succession of mens thoughts, there is nothing to
observe in the things they think on, but either in what they be Like One
Another, or in what they be Unlike, or What They Serve For, or How They
Serve To Such A Purpose; Those that observe their similitudes, in case
they be such as are but rarely observed by others, are sayd to have a
Good Wit; by which, in this occasion, is meant a Good Fancy. But they
that observe their differences, and dissimilitudes; which is called
Distinguishing, and Discerning, and Judging between thing and thing; in
case, such discerning be not easie, are said to have a Good Judgement:
and particularly in matter of conversation and businesse; wherein,
times, places, and persons are to be discerned, this Vertue is called
DISCRETION. The former, that is, Fancy, without the help of Judgement,
is not commended as a Vertue: but the later which is Judgement, and
Discretion, is commended for it selfe, without the help of Fancy.
Besides the Discretion of times, places, and persons, necessary to a
good Fancy, there is required also an often application of his thoughts
to their End; that is to say, to some use to be made of them. This done;
he that hath this Vertue, will be easily fitted with similitudes, that
will please, not onely by illustration of his discourse, and adorning it
with new and apt metaphors; but also, by the rarity or their invention.
But without Steddinesse, and Direction to some End, a great Fancy is one
kind of Madnesse; such as they have, that entring into any discourse,
are snatched from their purpose, by every thing that comes in their
thought, into so many, and so long digressions, and parentheses, that
they utterly lose themselves: Which kind of folly, I know no particular
name for: but the cause of it is, sometimes want of experience; whereby
that seemeth to a man new and rare, which doth not so to others:
sometimes Pusillanimity; by which that seems great to him, which other
men think a trifle: and whatsoever is new, or great, and therefore
thought fit to be told, withdrawes a man by degrees from the intended
way of his discourse.

In a good Poem, whether it be Epique, or Dramatique; as also in Sonnets,
Epigrams, and other Pieces, both Judgement and Fancy are required:
But the Fancy must be more eminent; because they please for the
Extravagancy; but ought not to displease by Indiscretion.

In a good History, the Judgement must be eminent; because the goodnesse
consisteth, in the Method, in the Truth, and in the Choyse of the
actions that are most profitable to be known. Fancy has no place, but
onely in adorning the stile.

In Orations of Prayse, and in Invectives, the Fancy is praedominant;
because the designe is not truth, but to Honour or Dishonour; which is
done by noble, or by vile comparisons. The Judgement does but suggest
what circumstances make an action laudable, or culpable.

In Hortatives, and Pleadings, as Truth, or Disguise serveth best to the
Designe in hand; so is the Judgement, or the Fancy most required.

In Demonstration, in Councell, and all rigourous search of Truth,
Judgement does all; except sometimes the understanding have need to be
opened by some apt similitude; and then there is so much use of Fancy.
But for Metaphors, they are in this case utterly excluded. For seeing
they openly professe deceipt; to admit them into Councell, or Reasoning,
were manifest folly.

And in any Discourse whatsoever, if the defect of Discretion be
apparent, how extravagant soever the Fancy be, the whole discourse
will be taken for a signe of want of wit; and so will it never when the
Discretion is manifest, though the Fancy be never so ordinary.

The secret thoughts of a man run over all things, holy, prophane,
clean, obscene, grave, and light, without shame, or blame; which verball
discourse cannot do, farther than the Judgement shall approve of the
Time, Place, and Persons. An Anatomist, or a Physitian may speak, or
write his judgement of unclean things; because it is not to please,
but profit: but for another man to write his extravagant, and pleasant
fancies of the same, is as if a man, from being tumbled into the dirt,
should come and present himselfe before good company. And ’tis the want
of Discretion that makes the difference. Again, in profest remissnesse
of mind, and familiar company, a man may play with the sounds, and
aequivocal significations of words; and that many times with encounters
of extraordinary Fancy: but in a Sermon, or in publique, or before
persons unknown, or whom we ought to reverence, there is no Gingling of
words that will not be accounted folly: and the difference is onely in
the want of Discretion. So that where Wit is wanting, it is not Fancy
that is wanting, but Discretion. Judgement therefore without Fancy is
Wit, but Fancy without Judgement not.




Prudence

When the thoughts of a man, that has a designe in hand, running over a
multitude of things, observes how they conduce to that designe; or what
designe they may conduce into; if his observations be such as are not
easie, or usuall, This wit of his is called PRUDENCE; and dependeth on
much Experience, and Memory of the like things, and their consequences
heretofore. In which there is not so much difference of Men, as there is
in their Fancies and Judgements; Because the Experience of men equall
in age, is not much unequall, as to the quantity; but lyes in different
occasions; every one having his private designes. To govern well a
family, and a kingdome, are not different degrees of Prudence; but
different sorts of businesse; no more then to draw a picture in little,
or as great, or greater then the life, are different degrees of Art. A
plain husband-man is more Prudent in affaires of his own house, then a
Privy Counseller in the affaires of another man.




Craft

To Prudence, if you adde the use of unjust, or dishonest means, such
as usually are prompted to men by Feare, or Want; you have that Crooked
Wisdome, which is called CRAFT; which is a signe of Pusillanimity. For
Magnanimity is contempt of unjust, or dishonest helps. And that which
the Latines Call Versutia, (translated into English, Shifting,) and is
a putting off of a present danger or incommodity, by engaging into
a greater, as when a man robbs one to pay another, is but a shorter
sighted Craft, called Versutia, from Versura, which signifies taking
mony at usurie, for the present payment of interest.




Acquired Wit

As for Acquired Wit, (I mean acquired by method and instruction,) there
is none but Reason; which is grounded on the right use of Speech; and
produceth the Sciences. But of Reason and Science, I have already spoken
in the fifth and sixth Chapters.

The causes of this difference of Witts, are in the Passions: and
the difference of Passions, proceedeth partly from the different
Constitution of the body, and partly from different Education. For if
the difference proceeded from the temper of the brain, and the organs of
Sense, either exterior or interior, there would be no lesse difference
of men in their Sight, Hearing, or other Senses, than in their Fancies,
and Discretions. It proceeds therefore from the Passions; which are
different, not onely from the difference of mens complexions; but also
from their difference of customes, and education.

The Passions that most of all cause the differences of Wit, are
principally, the more or lesse Desire of Power, of Riches, of Knowledge,
and of Honour. All which may be reduced to the first, that is Desire of
Power. For Riches, Knowledge and Honour are but severall sorts of Power.




Giddinesse Madnesse

And therefore, a man who has no great Passion for any of these things;
but is as men terme it indifferent; though he may be so farre a good
man, as to be free from giving offence; yet he cannot possibly have
either a great Fancy, or much Judgement. For the Thoughts, are to the
Desires, as Scouts, and Spies, to range abroad, and find the way to the
things Desired: All Stedinesse of the minds motion, and all quicknesse
of the same, proceeding from thence. For as to have no Desire, is to
be Dead: so to have weak Passions, is Dulnesse; and to have Passions
indifferently for every thing, GIDDINESSE, and Distraction; and to have
stronger, and more vehement Passions for any thing, than is ordinarily
seen in others, is that which men call MADNESSE.

Whereof there be almost as many kinds, as of the Passions themselves.
Sometimes the extraordinary and extravagant Passion, proceedeth from the
evill constitution of the organs of the Body, or harme done them; and
sometimes the hurt, and indisposition of the Organs, is caused by the
vehemence, or long continuance of the Passion. But in both cases the
Madnesse is of one and the same nature.

The Passion, whose violence, or continuance maketh Madnesse, is either
great Vaine-Glory; which is commonly called Pride, and Selfe-Conceipt;
or great Dejection of mind.




Rage

Pride, subjecteth a man to Anger, the excesse whereof, is the Madnesse
called RAGE, and FURY. And thus it comes to passe that excessive desire
of Revenge, when it becomes habituall, hurteth the organs, and becomes
Rage: That excessive love, with jealousie, becomes also Rage: Excessive
opinion of a mans own selfe, for divine inspiration, for wisdome,
learning, forme, and the like, becomes Distraction, and Giddinesse:
the same, joyned with Envy, Rage: Vehement opinion of the truth of any
thing, contradicted by others, Rage.




Melancholy

Dejection, subjects a man to causelesse fears; which is a Madnesse
commonly called MELANCHOLY, apparent also in divers manners; as in
haunting of solitudes, and graves; in superstitious behaviour; and in
fearing some one, some another particular thing. In summe, all Passions
that produce strange and unusuall behaviour, are called by the generall
name of Madnesse. But of the severall kinds of Madnesse, he that
would take the paines, might enrowle a legion. And if the Excesses be
madnesse, there is no doubt but the Passions themselves, when they tend
to Evill, are degrees of the same.

(For example,) Though the effect of folly, in them that are possessed of
an opinion of being inspired, be not visible alwayes in one man, by any
very extravagant action, that proceedeth from such Passion; yet when
many of them conspire together, the Rage of the whole multitude is
visible enough. For what argument of Madnesse can there be greater, than
to clamour, strike, and throw stones at our best friends? Yet this is
somewhat lesse than such a multitude will do. For they will clamour,
fight against, and destroy those, by whom all their lifetime before,
they have been protected, and secured from injury. And if this be
Madnesse in the multitude, it is the same in every particular man. For
as in the middest of the sea, though a man perceive no sound of
that part of the water next him; yet he is well assured, that part
contributes as much, to the Roaring of the Sea, as any other part, of
the same quantity: so also, thought wee perceive no great unquietnesse,
in one, or two men; yet we may be well assured, that their singular
Passions, are parts of the Seditious roaring of a troubled Nation. And
if there were nothing else that bewrayed their madnesse; yet that very
arrogating such inspiration to themselves, is argument enough. If some
man in Bedlam should entertaine you with sober discourse; and you desire
in taking leave, to know what he were, that you might another time
requite his civility; and he should tell you, he were God the Father;
I think you need expect no extravagant action for argument of his
Madnesse.

This opinion of Inspiration, called commonly, Private Spirit, begins
very often, from some lucky finding of an Errour generally held by
others; and not knowing, or not remembring, by what conduct of reason,
they came to so singular a truth, (as they think it, though it be many
times an untruth they light on,) they presently admire themselves; as
being in the speciall grace of God Almighty, who hath revealed the same
to them supernaturally, by his Spirit.

Again, that Madnesse is nothing else, but too much appearing Passion,
may be gathered out of the effects of Wine, which are the same with
those of the evill disposition of the organs. For the variety of
behaviour in men that have drunk too much, is the same with that of
Mad-men: some of them Raging, others Loving, others laughing, all
extravagantly, but according to their severall domineering Passions:
For the effect of the wine, does but remove Dissimulation; and take from
them the sight of the deformity of their Passions. For, (I believe) the
most sober men, when they walk alone without care and employment of the
mind, would be unwilling the vanity and Extravagance of their thoughts
at that time should be publiquely seen: which is a confession, that
Passions unguided, are for the most part meere Madnesse.

The opinions of the world, both in antient and later ages, concerning
the cause of madnesse, have been two. Some, deriving them from the
Passions; some, from Daemons, or Spirits, either good, or bad, which
they thought might enter into a man, possesse him, and move his organs
is such strange, and uncouth manner, as mad-men use to do. The former
sort therefore, called such men, Mad-men: but the Later, called them
sometimes Daemoniacks, (that is, possessed with spirits;) sometimes
Energumeni, (that is agitated, or moved with spirits;) and now in
Italy they are called not onely Pazzi, Mad-men; but also Spiritati, men
possest.

There was once a great conflux of people in Abdera, a City of the
Greeks, at the acting of the Tragedy of Andromeda, upon an extream hot
day: whereupon, a great many of the spectators falling into Fevers, had
this accident from the heat, and from The Tragedy together, that they
did nothing but pronounce Iambiques, with the names of Perseus and
Andromeda; which together with the Fever, was cured, by the comming on
of Winter: And this madnesse was thought to proceed from the Passion
imprinted by the Tragedy. Likewise there raigned a fit of madnesse in
another Graecian city, which seized onely the young Maidens; and caused
many of them to hang themselves. This was by most then thought an act of
the Divel. But one that suspected, that contempt of life in them,
might proceed from some Passion of the mind, and supposing they did not
contemne also their honour, gave counsell to the Magistrates, to strip
such as so hang’d themselves, and let them hang out naked. This the
story sayes cured that madnesse. But on the other side, the same
Graecians, did often ascribe madnesse, to the operation of the
Eumenides, or Furyes; and sometimes of Ceres, Phoebus, and other Gods:
so much did men attribute to Phantasmes, as to think them aereal living
bodies; and generally to call them Spirits. And as the Romans in this,
held the same opinion with the Greeks: so also did the Jewes; For they
calle mad-men Prophets, or (according as they thought the spirits
good or bad) Daemoniacks; and some of them called both Prophets, and
Daemoniacks, mad-men; and some called the same man both Daemoniack, and
mad-man. But for the Gentiles, ’tis no wonder; because Diseases, and
Health; Vices, and Vertues; and many naturall accidents, were with them
termed, and worshipped as Daemons. So that a man was to understand by
Daemon, as well (sometimes) an Ague, as a Divell. But for the Jewes to
have such opinion, is somewhat strange. For neither Moses, nor Abraham
pretended to Prophecy by possession of a Spirit; but from the voyce of
God; or by a Vision or Dream: Nor is there any thing in his Law,
Morall, or Ceremoniall, by which they were taught, there was any such
Enthusiasme; or any Possession. When God is sayd, (Numb. 11. 25.) to
take from the Spirit that was in Moses, and give it to the 70. Elders,
the Spirit of God (taking it for the substance of God) is not divided.
The Scriptures by the Spirit of God in man, mean a mans spirit, enclined
to Godlinesse. And where it is said (Exod. 28. 3.) "Whom I have filled
with the Spirit of wisdome to make garments for Aaron," is not meant a
spirit put into them, that can make garments; but the wisdome of their
own spirits in that kind of work. In the like sense, the spirit of
man, when it produceth unclean actions, is ordinarily called an unclean
spirit; and so other spirits, though not alwayes, yet as often as the
vertue or vice so stiled, is extraordinary, and Eminent. Neither did the
other Prophets of the old Testament pretend Enthusiasme; or, that God
spake in them; but to them by Voyce, Vision, or Dream; and the Burthen
Of The Lord was not Possession, but Command. How then could the Jewes
fall into this opinion of possession? I can imagine no reason, but that
which is common to all men; namely, the want of curiosity to search
naturall causes; and their placing Felicity, in the acquisition of the
grosse pleasures of the Senses, and the things that most immediately
conduce thereto. For they that see any strange, and unusuall ability, or
defect in a mans mind; unlesse they see withall, from what cause it may
probably proceed, can hardly think it naturall; and if not naturall,
they must needs thinke it supernaturall; and then what can it be, but
that either God, or the Divell is in him? And hence it came to passe,
when our Saviour (Mark 3.21.) was compassed about with the multitude,
those of the house doubted he was mad, and went out to hold him: but
the Scribes said he had Belzebub, and that was it, by which he cast out
divels; as if the greater mad-man had awed the lesser. And that (John
10. 20.) some said, "He hath a Divell, and is mad;" whereas others
holding him for a Prophet, sayd, "These are not the words of one that
hath a Divell." So in the old Testament he that came to anoynt Jehu, (2
Kings 9.11.) was a Prophet; but some of the company asked Jehu, "What
came that mad-man for?" So that in summe, it is manifest, that whosoever
behaved himselfe in extraordinary manner, was thought by the Jewes to be
possessed either with a good, or evill spirit; except by the Sadduces,
who erred so farre on the other hand, as not to believe there were at
all any spirits, (which is very neere to direct Atheisme;) and thereby
perhaps the more provoked others, to terme such men Daemoniacks, rather
than mad-men.

But why then does our Saviour proceed in the curing of them, as if they
were possest; and not as if they were mad. To which I can give no other
kind of answer, but that which is given to those that urge the Scripture
in like manner against the opinion of the motion of the Earth. The
Scripture was written to shew unto men the kingdome of God; and to
prepare their mindes to become his obedient subjects; leaving the
world, and the Philosophy thereof, to the disputation of men, for the
exercising of their naturall Reason. Whether the Earths, or Suns motion
make the day, and night; or whether the Exorbitant actions of men,
proceed from Passion, or from the Divell, (so we worship him not) it is
all one, as to our obedience, and subjection to God Almighty; which is
the thing for which the Scripture was written. As for that our Saviour
speaketh to the disease, as to a person; it is the usuall phrase of all
that cure by words onely, as Christ did, (and Inchanters pretend to
do, whether they speak to a Divel or not.) For is not Christ also said
(Math. 8.26.) to have rebuked the winds? Is not he said also (Luk. 4.
39.) to rebuke a Fever? Yet this does not argue that a Fever is a Divel.
And whereas many of these Divels are said to confesse Christ; it is not
necessary to interpret those places otherwise, than that those mad-men
confessed him. And whereas our Saviour (Math. 12. 43.) speaketh of an
unclean Spirit, that having gone out of a man, wandreth through dry
places, seeking rest, and finding none; and returning into the same
man, with seven other spirits worse than himselfe; It is manifestly a
Parable, alluding to a man, that after a little endeavour to quit his
lusts, is vanquished by the strength of them; and becomes seven times
worse than he was. So that I see nothing at all in the Scripture, that
requireth a beliefe, that Daemoniacks were any other thing but Mad-men.




Insignificant Speech

There is yet another fault in the Discourses of some men; which may also
be numbred amongst the sorts of Madnesse; namely, that abuse of words,
whereof I have spoken before in the fifth chapter, by the Name of
Absurdity. And that is, when men speak such words, as put together, have
in them no signification at all; but are fallen upon by some, through
misunderstanding of the words they have received, and repeat by rote; by
others, from intention to deceive by obscurity. And this is incident to
none but those, that converse in questions of matters incomprehensible,
as the Schoole-men; or in questions of abstruse Philosophy. The common
sort of men seldome speak Insignificantly, and are therefore, by those
other Egregious persons counted Idiots. But to be assured their words
are without any thing correspondent to them in the mind, there would
need some Examples; which if any man require, let him take a Schoole-man
into his hands, and see if he can translate any one chapter concerning
any difficult point; as the Trinity; the Deity; the nature of Christ;
Transubstantiation; Free-will. &c. into any of the moderne tongues, so
as to make the same intelligible; or into any tolerable Latine, such
as they were acquainted withall, that lived when the Latine tongue was
Vulgar. What is the meaning of these words. "The first cause does not
necessarily inflow any thing into the second, by force of the Essential
subordination of the second causes, by which it may help it to worke?"
They are the Translation of the Title of the sixth chapter of Suarez
first Booke, Of The Concourse, Motion, And Help Of God. When men write
whole volumes of such stuffe, are they not Mad, or intend to make others
so? And particularly, in the question of Transubstantiation; where
after certain words spoken, they that say, the White-nesse, Round-nesse,
Magni-tude, Quali-ty, Corruptibili-ty, all which are incorporeall, &c.
go out of the Wafer, into the Body of our blessed Saviour, do they not
make those Nesses, Tudes and Ties, to be so many spirits possessing his
body? For by Spirits, they mean alwayes things, that being incorporeall,
are neverthelesse moveable from one place to another. So that this kind
of Absurdity, may rightly be numbred amongst the many sorts of Madnesse;
and all the time that guided by clear Thoughts of their worldly lust,
they forbear disputing, or writing thus, but Lucide Intervals. And thus
much of the Vertues and Defects Intellectuall.



CHAPTER IX. OF THE SEVERALL SUBJECTS OF KNOWLEDGE


There are of KNOWLEDGE two kinds; whereof one is Knowledge Of Fact: the
other Knowledge Of The Consequence Of One Affirmation To Another. The
former is nothing else, but Sense and Memory, and is Absolute Knowledge;
as when we see a Fact doing, or remember it done: And this is the
Knowledge required in a Witnesse. The later is called Science; and is
Conditionall; as when we know, that, If The Figure Showne Be A Circle,
Then Any Straight Line Through The Centre Shall Divide It Into Two
Equall Parts. And this is the Knowledge required in a Philosopher; that
is to say, of him that pretends to Reasoning.

The Register of Knowledge Of Fact is called History. Whereof there be
two sorts: one called Naturall History; which is the History of such
Facts, or Effects of Nature, as have no Dependance on Mans Will; Such as
are the Histories of Metals, Plants, Animals, Regions, and the like. The
other, is Civill History; which is the History of the Voluntary Actions
of men in Common-wealths.

The Registers of Science, are such Books as contain the Demonstrations
of Consequences of one Affirmation, to another; and are commonly called
Books of Philosophy; whereof the sorts are many, according to the
diversity of the Matter; And may be divided in such manner as I have
divided them in the following Table.

  I. Science, that is, Knowledge of Consequences; which is called
     also PHILOSOPHY

     A.  Consequences from Accidents of Bodies Naturall; which is
        called NATURALL PHILOSOPHY

        1.  Consequences from the Accidents common to all Bodies Naturall;
           which are Quantity, and Motion.

           a.  Consequences from Quantity, and Motion Indeterminate;
              which, being the Principles or first foundation of
              Philosophy, is called Philosophia Prima

              PHILOSOPHIA PRIMA

           b.  Consequences from Motion, and Quantity Determined

              1) Consequences from Quantity, and Motion Determined

                 a) By Figure, By Number

                   1] Mathematiques,

                      GEOMETRY
                      ARITHMETIQUE

              2) Consequences from the Motion, and Quantity of Bodies in
                 Speciall

                 a) Consequences from the Motion, and Quantity of the
                    great parts of the World, as the Earth and Stars,

                    1] Cosmography

                       ASTRONOMY
                       GEOGRAPHY

                 b) Consequences from the Motion of Speciall kinds, and
                    Figures of Body,

                    1] Mechaniques, Doctrine of Weight

                       Science of
                       ENGINEERS
                       ARCHITECTURE
                       NAVIGATION

        2.  PHYSIQUES, or Consequences from Qualities

           a.  Consequences from the Qualities of Bodies Transient, such
              as sometimes appear, sometimes vanish

              METEOROLOGY

           b.  Consequences from the Qualities of Bodies Permanent

              1) Consequences from the Qualities of the Starres

                 a) Consequences from the Light of the Starres.  Out of
                    this, and the Motion of the Sunne, is made the
                    Science of

                    SCIOGRAPHY

                 b) Consequences from the Influence of the Starres,

                    ASTROLOGY

              2) Consequences of the Qualities from Liquid Bodies that
                 fill the space between the Starres; such as are the
                 Ayre, or substance aetherial.


              3) Consequences from Qualities of Bodies Terrestrial

                 a) Consequences from parts of the Earth that are
                    without Sense,

                    1] Consequences from Qualities of Minerals, as
                       Stones, Metals, &c
.                    2] Consequences from the Qualities of Vegetables

                 b) Consequences from Qualities of Animals

                    1] Consequences from Qualities of Animals in
                       Generall

                       a] Consequences from Vision,

                          OPTIQUES

                       b] Consequences from Sounds,

                          MUSIQUE

                       c] Consequences from the rest of the senses

                    2] Consequences from Qualities of Men in Speciall

                       a] Consequences from Passions of Men,

                          ETHIQUES

                       b] Consequences from Speech,

                          i) In Magnifying, Vilifying, etc.

                             POETRY

                          ii) In Persuading,

                              RHETORIQUE

                          iii) In Reasoning,

                               LOGIQUE

                          iv) In Contracting,

                              The Science of
                              JUST and UNJUST


     B.  Consequences from the Accidents of Politique Bodies; which is
        called POLITIQUES, and CIVILL PHILOSOPHY

        1.  Of Consequences from the Institution of COMMON-WEALTHS, to
           the Rights, and Duties of the Body Politique, or Soveraign.

        2.  Of Consequences from the same, to the Duty and Right of
           the Subjects.



CHAPTER X. OF POWER, WORTH, DIGNITY, HONOUR AND WORTHINESS




Power

The POWER of a Man, (to take it Universally,) is his present means,
to obtain some future apparent Good. And is either Originall, or
Instrumentall.

Naturall Power, is the eminence of the Faculties of Body, or Mind: as
extraordinary Strength, Forme, Prudence, Arts, Eloquence, Liberality,
Nobility. Instrumentall are those Powers, which acquired by these, or
by fortune, are means and Instruments to acquire more: as Riches,
Reputation, Friends, and the Secret working of God, which men call
Good Luck. For the nature of Power, is in this point, like to Fame,
increasing as it proceeds; or like the motion of heavy bodies, which the
further they go, make still the more hast.

The Greatest of humane Powers, is that which is compounded of the Powers
of most men, united by consent, in one person, Naturall, or civill, that
has the use of all their Powers depending on his will; such as is the
Power of a Common-wealth: or depending on the wills of each particular;
such as is the Power of a Faction, or of divers factions leagued.
Therefore to have servants, is Power; To have Friends, is Power: for
they are strengths united.

Also Riches joyned with liberality, is Power; because it procureth
friends, and servants: Without liberality, not so; because in this case
they defend not; but expose men to Envy, as a Prey.

Reputation of power, is Power; because it draweth with it the adhaerance
of those that need protection.

So is Reputation of love of a mans Country, (called Popularity,) for the
same Reason.

Also, what quality soever maketh a man beloved, or feared of many; or
the reputation of such quality, is Power; because it is a means to have
the assistance, and service of many.

Good successe is Power; because it maketh reputation of Wisdome, or good
fortune; which makes men either feare him, or rely on him.

Affability of men already in power, is encrease of Power; because it
gaineth love.

Reputation of Prudence in the conduct of Peace or War, is Power; because
to prudent men, we commit the government of our selves, more willingly
than to others.

Nobility is Power, not in all places, but onely in those Common-wealths,
where it has Priviledges: for in such priviledges consisteth their
Power.

Eloquence is Power; because it is seeming Prudence.

Forme is Power; because being a promise of Good, it recommendeth men to
the favour of women and strangers.

The Sciences, are small Power; because not eminent; and therefore, not
acknowledged in any man; nor are at all, but in a few; and in them, but
of a few things. For Science is of that nature, as none can understand
it to be, but such as in a good measure have attayned it.

Arts of publique use, as Fortification, making of Engines, and other
Instruments of War; because they conferre to Defence, and Victory,
are Power; And though the true Mother of them, be Science, namely the
Mathematiques; yet, because they are brought into the Light, by the hand
of the Artificer, they be esteemed (the Midwife passing with the vulgar
for the Mother,) as his issue.




Worth

The Value, or WORTH of a man, is as of all other things, his Price;
that is to say, so much as would be given for the use of his Power:
and therefore is not absolute; but a thing dependant on the need and
judgement of another. An able conductor of Souldiers, is of great Price
in time of War present, or imminent; but in Peace not so. A learned and
uncorrupt Judge, is much Worth in time of Peace; but not so much in
War. And as in other things, so in men, not the seller, but the buyer
determines the Price. For let a man (as most men do,) rate themselves as
the highest Value they can; yet their true Value is no more than it is
esteemed by others.

The manifestation of the Value we set on one another, is that which is
commonly called Honouring, and Dishonouring. To Value a man at a high
rate, is to Honour him; at a low rate, is to Dishonour him. But high,
and low, in this case, is to be understood by comparison to the rate
that each man setteth on himselfe.




Dignity

The publique worth of a man, which is the Value set on him by the
Common-wealth, is that which men commonly call DIGNITY. And this Value
of him by the Common-wealth, is understood, by offices of Command,
Judicature, publike Employment; or by Names and Titles, introduced for
distinction of such Value.




To Honour and Dishonour

To pray to another, for ayde of any kind, is to HONOUR; because a signe
we have an opinion he has power to help; and the more difficult the ayde
is, the more is the Honour.

To obey, is to Honour; because no man obeyes them, whom they think
have no power to help, or hurt them. And consequently to disobey, is to
Dishonour.

To give great gifts to a man, is to Honour him; because ’tis buying
of Protection, and acknowledging of Power. To give little gifts, is to
Dishonour; because it is but Almes, and signifies an opinion of the
need of small helps. To be sedulous in promoting anothers good; also
to flatter, is to Honour; as a signe we seek his protection or ayde. To
neglect, is to Dishonour.

To give way, or place to another, in any Commodity, is to Honour; being
a confession of greater power. To arrogate, is to Dishonour.

To shew any signe of love, or feare of another, is to Honour; for both
to love, and to feare, is to value. To contemne, or lesse to love or
feare then he expects, is to Dishonour; for ’tis undervaluing.

To praise, magnifie, or call happy, is to Honour; because nothing but
goodnesse, power, and felicity is valued. To revile, mock, or pitty, is
to Dishonour.

To speak to another with consideration, to appear before him with
decency, and humility, is to Honour him; as signes of fear to offend.
To speak to him rashly, to do anything before him obscenely, slovenly,
impudently, is to Dishonour.

To believe, to trust, to rely on another, is to Honour him; signe of
opinion of his vertue and power. To distrust, or not believe, is to
Dishonour.

To hearken to a mans counsell, or discourse of what kind soever, is to
Honour; as a signe we think him wise, or eloquent, or witty. To sleep,
or go forth, or talk the while, is to Dishonour.

To do those things to another, which he takes for signes of Honour, or
which the Law or Custome makes so, is to Honour; because in approving
the Honour done by others, he acknowledgeth the power which others
acknowledge. To refuse to do them, is to Dishonour.

To agree with in opinion, is to Honour; as being a signe of approving
his judgement, and wisdome. To dissent, is Dishonour; and an upbraiding
of errour; and (if the dissent be in many things) of folly.

To imitate, is to Honour; for it is vehemently to approve. To imitate
ones Enemy, is to Dishonour.

To honour those another honours, is to Honour him; as a signe of
approbation of his judgement. To honour his Enemies, is to Dishonour
him.

To employ in counsell, or in actions of difficulty, is to Honour; as a
signe of opinion of his wisdome, or other power. To deny employment in
the same cases, to those that seek it, is to Dishonour.

All these wayes of Honouring, are naturall; and as well within, as
without Common-wealths. But in Common-wealths, where he, or they that
have the supreme Authority, can make whatsoever they please, to stand
for signes of Honour, there be other Honours.

A Soveraigne doth Honour a Subject, with whatsoever Title, or Office, or
Employment, or Action, that he himselfe will have taken for a signe of
his will to Honour him.

The King of Persia, Honoured Mordecay, when he appointed he should be
conducted through the streets in the Kings Garment, upon one of the
Kings Horses, with a Crown on his head, and a Prince before him,
proclayming, "Thus shall it be done to him that the King will honour."
And yet another King of Persia, or the same another time, to one that
demanded for some great service, to weare one of the Kings robes, gave
him leave so to do; but with his addition, that he should weare it as
the Kings foole; and then it was Dishonour. So that of Civill Honour;
such as are Magistracy, Offices, Titles; and in some places Coats, and
Scutchions painted: and men Honour such as have them, as having so many
signes of favour in the Common-wealth; which favour is Power.

Honourable is whatsoever possession, action, or quality, is an argument
and signe of Power.

And therefore To be Honoured, loved, or feared of many, is Honourable;
as arguments of Power. To be Honoured of few or none, Dishonourable.

Good fortune (if lasting,) Honourable; as a signe of the favour of God.
Ill fortune, and losses, Dishonourable. Riches, are Honourable; for
they are Power. Poverty, Dishonourable. Magnanimity, Liberality,
Hope, Courage, Confidence, are Honourable; for they proceed from the
conscience of Power. Pusillanimity, Parsimony, Fear, Diffidence, are
Dishonourable.

Timely Resolution, or determination of what a man is to do, is
Honourable; as being the contempt of small difficulties, and dangers.
And Irresolution, Dishonourable; as a signe of too much valuing of
little impediments, and little advantages: For when a man has weighed
things as long as the time permits, and resolves not, the difference
of weight is but little; and therefore if he resolve not, he overvalues
little things, which is Pusillanimity.

All Actions, and Speeches, that proceed, or seem to proceed from much
Experience, Science, Discretion, or Wit, are Honourable; For all these
are Powers. Actions, or Words that proceed from Errour, Ignorance, or
Folly, Dishonourable.

Gravity, as farre forth as it seems to proceed from a mind employed on
some thing else, is Honourable; because employment is a signe of
Power. But if it seem to proceed from a purpose to appear grave, it is
Dishonourable. For the gravity of the Former, is like the steddinesse of
a Ship laden with Merchandise; but of the later, like the steddinesse of
a Ship ballasted with Sand, and other trash.

To be Conspicuous, that is to say, to be known, for Wealth, Office,
great Actions, or any eminent Good, is Honourable; as a signe of the
power for which he is conspicuous. On the contrary, Obscurity, is
Dishonourable.

To be descended from conspicuous Parents, is Honourable; because they
the more easily attain the aydes, and friends of their Ancestors. On the
contrary, to be descended from obscure Parentage, is Dishonourable.

Actions proceeding from Equity, joyned with losse, are Honourable;
as signes of Magnanimity: for Magnanimity is a signe of Power. On the
contrary, Craft, Shifting, neglect of Equity, is Dishonourable.

Nor does it alter the case of Honour, whether an action (so it be great
and difficult, and consequently a signe of much power,) be just or
unjust: for Honour consisteth onely in the opinion of Power. Therefore
the ancient Heathen did not thinke they Dishonoured, but greatly
Honoured the Gods, when they introduced them in their Poems, committing
Rapes, Thefts, and other great, but unjust, or unclean acts: In so much
as nothing is so much celebrated in Jupiter, as his Adulteries; nor
in Mercury, as his Frauds, and Thefts: of whose praises, in a hymne
of Homer, the greatest is this, that being born in the morning, he had
invented Musique at noon, and before night, stolen away the Cattell of
Appollo, from his Herdsmen.

Also amongst men, till there were constituted great Common-wealths,
it was thought no dishonour to be a Pyrate, or a High-way Theefe; but
rather a lawfull Trade, not onely amongst the Greeks, but also amongst
all other Nations; as is manifest by the Histories of antient time. And
at this day, in this part of the world, private Duels are, and alwayes
will be Honourable, though unlawfull, till such time as there shall be
Honour ordained for them that refuse, and Ignominy for them that make
the Challenge. For Duels also are many times effects of Courage; and the
ground of Courage is alwayes Strength or Skill, which are Power; though
for the most part they be effects of rash speaking, and of the fear of
Dishonour, in one, or both the Combatants; who engaged by rashnesse, are
driven into the Lists to avoyd disgrace.

Scutchions, and coats of Armes haereditary, where they have any eminent
Priviledges, are Honourable; otherwise not: for their Power consisteth
either in such Priviledges, or in Riches, or some such thing as is
equally honoured in other men. This kind of Honour, commonly called
Gentry, has been derived from the Antient Germans. For there never was
any such thing known, where the German Customes were unknown. Nor is it
now any where in use, where the Germans have not inhabited. The antient
Greek Commanders, when they went to war, had their Shields painted with
such Devises as they pleased; insomuch as an unpainted Buckler was a
signe of Poverty, and of a common Souldier: but they transmitted not the
Inheritance of them. The Romans transmitted the Marks of their Families:
but they were the Images, not the Devises of their Ancestors. Amongst
the people of Asia, Afrique, and America, there is not, nor was ever,
any such thing. The Germans onely had that custome; from whom it has
been derived into England, France, Spain, and Italy, when in great
numbers they either ayded the Romans, or made their own Conquests in
these Westerne parts of the world.

For Germany, being antiently, as all other Countries, in their
beginnings, divided amongst an infinite number of little Lords, or
Masters of Families, that continually had wars one with another; those
Masters, or Lords, principally to the end they might, when they were
Covered with Arms, be known by their followers; and partly for ornament,
both painted their Armor, or their Scutchion, or Coat, with the picture
of some Beast, or other thing; and also put some eminent and visible
mark upon the Crest of their Helmets. And his ornament both of the
Armes, and Crest, descended by inheritance to their Children; to the
eldest pure, and to the rest with some note of diversity, such as the
Old master, that is to say in Dutch, the Here-alt thought fit. But when
many such Families, joyned together, made a greater Monarchy, this duty
of the Herealt, to distinguish Scutchions, was made a private Office
a part. And the issue of these Lords, is the great and antient Gentry;
which for the most part bear living creatures, noted for courage, and
rapine; or Castles, Battlements, Belts, Weapons, Bars, Palisadoes, and
other notes of War; nothing being then in honour, but vertue military.
Afterwards, not onely Kings, but popular Common-wealths, gave divers
manners of Scutchions, to such as went forth to the War, or returned
from it, for encouragement, or recompence to their service. All which,
by an observing Reader, may be found in such ancient Histories, Greek
and Latine, as make mention of the German Nation, and Manners, in their
times.




Titles of Honour

Titles of Honour, such as are Duke, Count, Marquis, and Baron, are
Honourable; as signifying the value set upon them by the Soveraigne
Power of the Common-wealth: Which Titles, were in old time titles
of Office, and Command, derived some from the Romans, some from the
Germans, and French. Dukes, in Latine Duces, being Generalls in War:
Counts, Comites, such as bare the Generall company out of friendship;
and were left to govern and defend places conquered, and pacified:
Marquises, Marchiones, were Counts that governed the Marches, or bounds
of the Empire. Which titles of Duke, Count, and Marquis, came into the
Empire, about the time of Constantine the Great, from the customes of
the German Militia. But Baron, seems to have been a Title of the Gaules,
and signifies a Great man; such as were the Kings, or Princes men, whom
they employed in war about their persons; and seems to be derived from
Vir, to Ber, and Bar, that signified the same in the Language of the
Gaules, that Vir in Latine; and thence to Bero, and Baro: so that such
men were called Berones, and after Barones; and (in Spanish) Varones.
But he that would know more particularly the originall of Titles of
Honour, may find it, as I have done this, in Mr. Seldens most excellent
Treatise of that subject. In processe of time these offices of Honour,
by occasion of trouble, and for reasons of good and peacable government,
were turned into meer Titles; serving for the most part, to distinguish
the precedence, place, and order of subjects in the Common-wealth: and
men were made Dukes, Counts, Marquises, and Barons of Places, wherein
they had neither possession, nor command: and other Titles also, were
devised to the same end.




Worthinesse Fitnesse

WORTHINESSE, is a thing different from the worth, or value of a man; and
also from his merit, or desert; and consisteth in a particular power,
or ability for that, whereof he is said to be worthy: which particular
ability, is usually named FITNESSE, or Aptitude.

For he is Worthiest to be a Commander, to be a Judge, or to have any
other charge, that is best fitted, with the qualities required to the
well discharging of it; and Worthiest of Riches, that has the qualities
most requisite for the well using of them: any of which qualities being
absent, one may neverthelesse be a Worthy man, and valuable for
some thing else. Again, a man may be Worthy of Riches, Office, and
Employment, that neverthelesse, can plead no right to have it before
another; and therefore cannot be said to merit or deserve it. For Merit,
praesupposeth a right, and that the thing deserved is due by promise: Of
which I shall say more hereafter, when I shall speak of Contracts.




CHAPTER XI. OF THE DIFFERENCE OF MANNERS




What Is Here Meant By Manners

By MANNERS, I mean not here, Decency of behaviour; as how one man should
salute another, or how a man should wash his mouth, or pick his teeth
before company, and such other points of the Small Morals; But those
qualities of man-kind, that concern their living together in Peace, and
Unity. To which end we are to consider, that the Felicity of this life,
consisteth not in the repose of a mind satisfied. For there is no such
Finis Ultimus, (utmost ayme,) nor Summum Bonum, (greatest good,) as is
spoken of in the Books of the old Morall Philosophers. Nor can a man
any more live, whose Desires are at an end, than he, whose Senses and
Imaginations are at a stand. Felicity is a continuall progresse of the
desire, from one object to another; the attaining of the former, being
still but the way to the later. The cause whereof is, That the object
of mans desire, is not to enjoy once onely, and for one instant of time;
but to assure for ever, the way of his future desire. And therefore the
voluntary actions, and inclinations of all men, tend, not only to the
procuring, but also to the assuring of a contented life; and differ
onely in the way: which ariseth partly from the diversity of passions,
in divers men; and partly from the difference of the knowledge, or
opinion each one has of the causes, which produce the effect desired.




A Restlesse Desire Of Power, In All Men

So that in the first place, I put for a generall inclination of all
mankind, a perpetuall and restlesse desire of Power after power, that
ceaseth onely in Death. And the cause of this, is not alwayes that a man
hopes for a more intensive delight, than he has already attained to; or
that he cannot be content with a moderate power: but because he cannot
assure the power and means to live well, which he hath present, without
the acquisition of more. And from hence it is, that Kings, whose power
is greatest, turn their endeavours to the assuring it a home by Lawes,
or abroad by Wars: and when that is done, there succeedeth a new desire;
in some, of Fame from new Conquest; in others, of ease and sensuall
pleasure; in others, of admiration, or being flattered for excellence in
some art, or other ability of the mind.




Love Of Contention From Competition

Competition of Riches, Honour, command, or other power, enclineth to
Contention, Enmity, and War: because the way of one Competitor, to the
attaining of his desire, is to kill, subdue, supplant, or repell the
other. Particularly, competition of praise, enclineth to a reverence of
Antiquity. For men contend with the living, not with the dead; to these
ascribing more than due, that they may obscure the glory of the other.




Civil Obedience From Love Of Ease

Desire of Ease, and sensuall Delight, disposeth men to obey a common
Power: because by such Desires, a man doth abandon the protection might
be hoped for from his own Industry, and labour.




From Feare Of Death Or Wounds

Fear of Death, and Wounds, disposeth to the same; and for the same
reason. On the contrary, needy men, and hardy, not contented with their
present condition; as also, all men that are ambitious of Military
command, are enclined to continue the causes of warre; and to stirre up
trouble and sedition: for there is no honour Military but by warre; nor
any such hope to mend an ill game, as by causing a new shuffle.




And From Love Of Arts

Desire of Knowledge, and Arts of Peace, enclineth men to obey a common
Power: For such Desire, containeth a desire of leasure; and consequently
protection from some other Power than their own.




Love Of Vertue, From Love Of Praise

Desire of Praise, disposeth to laudable actions, such as please them
whose judgement they value; for of these men whom we contemn, we contemn
also the Praises. Desire of Fame after death does the same. And though
after death, there be no sense of the praise given us on Earth, as being
joyes, that are either swallowed up in the unspeakable joyes of Heaven,
or extinguished in the extreme torments of Hell: yet is not such Fame
vain; because men have a present delight therein, from the foresight
of it, and of the benefit that may rebound thereby to their posterity:
which though they now see not, yet they imagine; and any thing that is
pleasure in the sense, the same also is pleasure in the imagination.




Hate, From Difficulty Of Requiting Great Benefits

To have received from one, to whom we think our selves equall, greater
benefits than there is hope to Requite, disposeth to counterfiet love;
but really secret hatred; and puts a man into the estate of a desperate
debtor, that in declining the sight of his creditor, tacitely wishes
him there, where he might never see him more. For benefits oblige; and
obligation is thraldome; which is to ones equall, hateful. But to have
received benefits from one, whom we acknowledge our superiour, enclines
to love; because the obligation is no new depession: and cheerfull
acceptation, (which men call Gratitude,) is such an honour done to
the obliger, as is taken generally for retribution. Also to receive
benefits, though from an equall, or inferiour, as long as there is hope
of requitall, disposeth to love: for in the intention of the receiver,
the obligation is of ayd, and service mutuall; from whence proceedeth
an Emulation of who shall exceed in benefiting; the most noble and
profitable contention possible; wherein the victor is pleased with his
victory, and the other revenged by confessing it.




And From Conscience Of Deserving To Be Hated

To have done more hurt to a man, than he can, or is willing to expiate,
enclineth the doer to hate the sufferer. For he must expect revenge, or
forgivenesse; both which are hatefull.




Promptnesse To Hurt, From Fear

Feare of oppression, disposeth a man to anticipate, or to seek ayd by
society: for there is no other way by which a man can secure his life
and liberty.




And From Distrust Of Their Own Wit

Men that distrust their own subtilty, are in tumult, and sedition,
better disposed for victory, than they that suppose themselves wise,
or crafty. For these love to consult, the other (fearing to be
circumvented,) to strike first. And in sedition, men being alwayes in
the procincts of Battell, to hold together, and use all advantages of
force, is a better stratagem, than any that can proceed from subtilty of
Wit.




Vain Undertaking From Vain-glory

Vain-glorious men, such as without being conscious to themselves of
great sufficiency, delight in supposing themselves gallant men, are
enclined onely to ostentation; but not to attempt: Because when
danger or difficulty appears, they look for nothing but to have their
insufficiency discovered.

Vain-glorious men, such as estimate their sufficiency by the flattery
of other men, or the fortune of some precedent action, without assured
ground of hope from the true knowledge of themselves, are enclined to
rash engaging; and in the approach of danger, or difficulty, to retire
if they can: because not seeing the way of safety, they will rather
hazard their honour, which may be salved with an excuse; than their
lives, for which no salve is sufficient.




Ambition, From Opinion Of Sufficiency

Men that have a strong opinion of their own wisdome in matter of
government, are disposed to Ambition. Because without publique
Employment in counsell or magistracy, the honour of their wisdome is
lost. And therefore Eloquent speakers are enclined to Ambition; for
Eloquence seemeth wisdome, both to themselves and others




Irresolution, From Too Great Valuing Of Small Matters

Pusillanimity disposeth men to Irresolution, and consequently to lose
the occasions, and fittest opportunities of action. For after men have
been in deliberation till the time of action approach, if it be not
then manifest what is best to be done, tis a signe, the difference of
Motives, the one way and the other, are not great: Therefore not to
resolve then, is to lose the occasion by weighing of trifles; which is
pusillanimity.

Frugality,(though in poor men a Vertue,) maketh a man unapt to atchieve
such actions, as require the strength of many men at once: For it
weakeneth their Endeavour, which is to be nourished and kept in vigor by
Reward.

Confidence In Others From Ignorance Of The Marks Of Wisdome and
Kindnesse Eloquence, with flattery, disposeth men to confide in them
that have it; because the former is seeming Wisdome, the later seeming
Kindnesse. Adde to them Military reputation, and it disposeth men to
adhaere, and subject themselves to those men that have them. The two
former, having given them caution against danger from him; the later
gives them caution against danger from others.




And From The Ignorance Of Naturall Causes

Want of Science, that is, Ignorance of causes, disposeth, or rather
constraineth a man to rely on the advise, and authority of others. For
all men whom the truth concernes, if they rely not on their own,
must rely on the opinion of some other, whom they think wiser than
themselves, and see not why he should deceive them.




And From Want Of Understanding

Ignorance of the signification of words; which is, want of
understanding, disposeth men to take on trust, not onely the truth they
know not; but also the errors; and which is more, the non-sense of them
they trust: For neither Error, nor non-sense, can without a perfect
understanding of words, be detected.

From the same it proceedeth, that men give different names, to one and
the same thing, from the difference of their own passions: As they that
approve a private opinion, call it Opinion; but they that mislike it,
Haeresie: and yet haeresie signifies no more than private opinion; but
has onely a greater tincture of choler.

From the same also it proceedeth, that men cannot distinguish, without
study and great understanding, between one action of many men, and many
actions of one multitude; as for example, between the one action of
all the Senators of Rome in killing Catiline, and the many actions of a
number of Senators in killing Caesar; and therefore are disposed to take
for the action of the people, that which is a multitude of actions done
by a multitude of men, led perhaps by the perswasion of one.

Adhaerence To Custome, From Ignorance Of The Nature Of Right And Wrong
Ignorance of the causes, and originall constitution of Right, Equity,
Law, and Justice, disposeth a man to make Custome and Example the rule
of his actions; in such manner, as to think that Unjust which it
hath been the custome to punish; and that Just, of the impunity and
approbation whereof they can produce an Example, or (as the Lawyers
which onely use the false measure of Justice barbarously call it) a
Precedent; like little children, that have no other rule of good and
evill manners, but the correction they receive from their Parents, and
Masters; save that children are constant to their rule, whereas men are
not so; because grown strong, and stubborn, they appeale from custome
to reason, and from reason to custome, as it serves their turn; receding
from custome when their interest requires it, and setting themselves
against reason, as oft as reason is against them: Which is the cause,
that the doctrine of Right and Wrong, is perpetually disputed, both by
the Pen and the Sword: whereas the doctrine of Lines, and Figures, is
not so; because men care not, in that subject what be truth, as a thing
that crosses no mans ambition, profit, or lust. For I doubt not, but if
it had been a thing contrary to any mans right of dominion, or to the
interest of men that have dominion, That The Three Angles Of A Triangle
Should Be Equall To Two Angles Of A Square; that doctrine should have
been, if not disputed, yet by the burning of all books of Geometry,
suppressed, as farre as he whom it concerned was able.

Adhaerence To Private Men, From Ignorance Of The Causes Of Peace
Ignorance of remote causes, disposeth men to attribute all events, to
the causes immediate, and Instrumentall: For these are all the causes
they perceive. And hence it comes to passe, that in all places, men that
are grieved with payments to the Publique, discharge their anger upon
the Publicans, that is to say, Farmers, Collectors, and other Officers
of the publique Revenue; and adhaere to such as find fault with the
publike Government; and thereby, when they have engaged themselves
beyond hope of justification, fall also upon the Supreme Authority, for
feare of punishment, or shame of receiving pardon.




Credulity From Ignorance Of Nature

Ignorance of naturall causes disposeth a man to Credulity, so as
to believe many times impossibilities: for such know nothing to
the contrary, but that they may be true; being unable to detect the
Impossibility. And Credulity, because men love to be hearkened unto in
company, disposeth them to lying: so that Ignorance it selfe without
Malice, is able to make a man bothe to believe lyes, and tell them; and
sometimes also to invent them.




Curiosity To Know, From Care Of Future Time

Anxiety for the future time, disposeth men to enquire into the causes
of things: because the knowledge of them, maketh men the better able to
order the present to their best advantage.




Naturall Religion, From The Same

Curiosity, or love of the knowledge of causes, draws a man from
consideration of the effect, to seek the cause; and again, the cause of
that cause; till of necessity he must come to this thought at last, that
there is some cause, whereof there is no former cause, but is eternall;
which is it men call God. So that it is impossible to make any profound
enquiry into naturall causes, without being enclined thereby to believe
there is one God Eternall; though they cannot have any Idea of him in
their mind, answerable to his nature. For as a man that is born blind,
hearing men talk of warming themselves by the fire, and being brought
to warm himself by the same, may easily conceive, and assure himselfe,
there is somewhat there, which men call Fire, and is the cause of the
heat he feeles; but cannot imagine what it is like; nor have an Idea of
it in his mind, such as they have that see it: so also, by the visible
things of this world, and their admirable order, a man may conceive
there is a cause of them, which men call God; and yet not have an Idea,
or Image of him in his mind.

And they that make little, or no enquiry into the naturall causes of
things, yet from the feare that proceeds from the ignorance it selfe,
of what it is that hath the power to do them much good or harm, are
enclined to suppose, and feign unto themselves, severall kinds of Powers
Invisible; and to stand in awe of their own imaginations; and in time
of distresse to invoke them; as also in the time of an expected good
successe, to give them thanks; making the creatures of their own
fancy, their Gods. By which means it hath come to passe, that from the
innumerable variety of Fancy, men have created in the world innumerable
sorts of Gods. And this Feare of things invisible, is the naturall Seed
of that, which every one in himself calleth Religion; and in them that
worship, or feare that Power otherwise than they do, Superstition.

And this seed of Religion, having been observed by many; some of those
that have observed it, have been enclined thereby to nourish, dresse,
and forme it into Lawes; and to adde to it of their own invention,
any opinion of the causes of future events, by which they thought they
should best be able to govern others, and make unto themselves the
greatest use of their Powers.



CHAPTER XII. OF RELIGION




Religion, In Man Onely

Seeing there are no signes, nor fruit of Religion, but in Man onely;
there is no cause to doubt, but that the seed of Religion, is also onely
in Man; and consisteth in some peculiar quality, or at least in some
eminent degree thereof, not to be found in other Living creatures.




First, From His Desire Of Knowing Causes

And first, it is peculiar to the nature of Man, to be inquisitive into
the Causes of the Events they see, some more, some lesse; but all men so
much, as to be curious in the search of the causes of their own good and
evill fortune.




From The Consideration Of The Beginning Of Things

Secondly, upon the sight of any thing that hath a Beginning, to think
also it had a cause, which determined the same to begin, then when it
did, rather than sooner or later.




From His Observation Of The Sequell Of Things

Thirdly, whereas there is no other Felicity of Beasts, but the enjoying
of their quotidian Food, Ease, and Lusts; as having little, or no
foresight of the time to come, for want of observation, and memory
of the order, consequence, and dependance of the things they see; Man
observeth how one Event hath been produced by another; and remembreth in
them Antecedence and Consequence; And when he cannot assure himselfe of
the true causes of things, (for the causes of good and evill fortune for
the most part are invisible,) he supposes causes of them, either such
as his own fancy suggesteth; or trusteth to the Authority of other men,
such as he thinks to be his friends, and wiser than himselfe.

The Naturall Cause Of Religion, The Anxiety Of The Time To Come The
two first, make Anxiety. For being assured that there be causes of all
things that have arrived hitherto, or shall arrive hereafter; it is
impossible for a man, who continually endeavoureth to secure himselfe
against the evill he feares, and procure the good he desireth, not to
be in a perpetuall solicitude of the time to come; So that every man,
especially those that are over provident, are in an estate like to that
of Prometheus. For as Prometheus, (which interpreted, is, The Prudent
Man,) was bound to the hill Caucasus, a place of large prospect, where,
an Eagle feeding on his liver, devoured in the day, as much as was
repayred in the night: So that man, which looks too far before him, in
the care of future time, hath his heart all the day long, gnawed on by
feare of death, poverty, or other calamity; and has no repose, nor pause
of his anxiety, but in sleep.




Which Makes Them Fear The Power Of Invisible Things

This perpetuall feare, alwayes accompanying mankind in the ignorance of
causes, as it were in the Dark, must needs have for object something.
And therefore when there is nothing to be seen, there is nothing to
accuse, either of their good, or evill fortune, but some Power, or Agent
Invisible: In which sense perhaps it was, that some of the old Poets
said, that the Gods were at first created by humane Feare: which spoken
of the Gods, (that is to say, of the many Gods of the Gentiles) is
very true. But the acknowledging of one God Eternall, Infinite, and
Omnipotent, may more easily be derived, from the desire men have to
know the causes of naturall bodies, and their severall vertues, and
operations; than from the feare of what was to befall them in time to
come. For he that from any effect hee seeth come to passe, should reason
to the next and immediate cause thereof, and from thence to the cause
of that cause, and plonge himselfe profoundly in the pursuit of causes;
shall at last come to this, that there must be (as even the Heathen
Philosophers confessed) one First Mover; that is, a First, and an
Eternall cause of all things; which is that which men mean by the name
of God: And all this without thought of their fortune; the solicitude
whereof, both enclines to fear, and hinders them from the search of the
causes of other things; and thereby gives occasion of feigning of as
many Gods, as there be men that feigne them.




And Suppose Them Incorporeall

And for the matter, or substance of the Invisible Agents, so fancyed;
they could not by naturall cogitation, fall upon any other conceipt, but
that it was the same with that of the Soule of man; and that the Soule
of man, was of the same substance, with that which appeareth in a Dream,
to one that sleepeth; or in a Looking-glasse, to one that is awake;
which, men not knowing that such apparitions are nothing else but
creatures of the Fancy, think to be reall, and externall Substances;
and therefore call them Ghosts; as the Latines called them Imagines,
and Umbrae; and thought them Spirits, that is, thin aereall bodies; and
those Invisible Agents, which they feared, to bee like them; save that
they appear, and vanish when they please. But the opinion that such
Spirits were Incorporeall, or Immateriall, could never enter into the
mind of any man by nature; because, though men may put together words of
contradictory signification, as Spirit, and Incorporeall; yet they
can never have the imagination of any thing answering to them:
And therefore, men that by their own meditation, arrive to the
acknowledgement of one Infinite, Omnipotent, and Eternall God,
choose rather to confesse he is Incomprehensible, and above their
understanding; than to define his Nature By Spirit Incorporeall, and
then Confesse their definition to be unintelligible: or if they give him
such a title, it is not Dogmatically, with intention to make the Divine
Nature understood; but Piously, to honour him with attributes, of
significations, as remote as they can from the grossenesse of Bodies
Visible.




But Know Not The Way How They Effect Anything

Then, for the way by which they think these Invisible Agents wrought
their effects; that is to say, what immediate causes they used, in
bringing things to passe, men that know not what it is that we call
Causing, (that is, almost all men) have no other rule to guesse by, but
by observing, and remembring what they have seen to precede the like
effect at some other time, or times before, without seeing between the
antecedent and subsequent Event, any dependance or connexion at all:
And therefore from the like things past, they expect the like things to
come; and hope for good or evill luck, superstitiously, from things that
have no part at all in the causing of it: As the Athenians did for their
war at Lepanto, demand another Phormio; the Pompeian faction for their
warre in Afrique, another Scipio; and others have done in divers other
occasions since. In like manner they attribute their fortune to a
stander by, to a lucky or unlucky place, to words spoken, especially
if the name of God be amongst them; as Charming, and Conjuring (the
Leiturgy of Witches;) insomuch as to believe, they have power to turn a
stone into bread, bread into a man, or any thing, into any thing.




But Honour Them As They Honour Men

Thirdly, for the worship which naturally men exhibite to Powers
invisible, it can be no other, but such expressions of their reverence,
as they would use towards men; Gifts, Petitions, Thanks, Submission
of Body, Considerate Addresses, sober Behaviour, premeditated Words,
Swearing (that is, assuring one another of their promises,) by invoking
them. Beyond that reason suggesteth nothing; but leaves them either to
rest there; or for further ceremonies, to rely on those they believe to
be wiser than themselves.




And Attribute To Them All Extraordinary Events

Lastly, concerning how these Invisible Powers declare to men the things
which shall hereafter come to passe, especially concerning their good
or evill fortune in generall, or good or ill successe in any particular
undertaking, men are naturally at a stand; save that using to conjecture
of the time to come, by the time past, they are very apt, not onely to
take casuall things, after one or two encounters, for Prognostiques
of the like encounter ever after, but also to believe the like
Prognostiques from other men, of whom they have once conceived a good
opinion.




Foure Things, Naturall Seeds Of Religion

And in these foure things, Opinion of Ghosts, Ignorance of second
causes, Devotion towards what men fear, and Taking of things Casuall for
Prognostiques, consisteth the Naturall seed of Religion; which by reason
of the different Fancies, Judgements, and Passions of severall men, hath
grown up into ceremonies so different, that those which are used by one
man, are for the most part ridiculous to another.




Made Different By Culture

For these seeds have received culture from two sorts of men. One sort
have been they, that have nourished, and ordered them, according to
their own invention. The other, have done it, by Gods commandement, and
direction: but both sorts have done it, with a purpose to make those men
that relyed on them, the more apt to Obedience, Lawes, Peace, Charity,
and civill Society. So that the Religion of the former sort, is a part
of humane Politiques; and teacheth part of the duty which Earthly Kings
require of their Subjects. And the Religion of the later sort is
Divine Politiques; and containeth Precepts to those that have yeelded
themselves subjects in the Kingdome of God. Of the former sort, were all
the Founders of Common-wealths, and the Law-givers of the Gentiles: Of
the later sort, were Abraham, Moses, and our Blessed Saviour; by whom
have been derived unto us the Lawes of the Kingdome of God.




The Absurd Opinion Of Gentilisme

And for that part of Religion, which consisteth in opinions concerning
the nature of Powers Invisible, there is almost nothing that has a
name, that has not been esteemed amongst the Gentiles, in one place or
another, a God, or Divell; or by their Poets feigned to be inanimated,
inhabited, or possessed by some Spirit or other.

The unformed matter of the World, was a God, by the name of Chaos.

The Heaven, the Ocean, the Planets, the Fire, the Earth, the Winds, were
so many Gods.

Men, Women, a Bird, a Crocodile, a Calf, a Dogge, a Snake, an Onion,
a Leeke, Deified. Besides, that they filled almost all places, with
spirits called Daemons; the plains, with Pan, and Panises, or Satyres;
the Woods, with Fawnes, and Nymphs; the Sea, with Tritons, and other
Nymphs; every River, and Fountayn, with a Ghost of his name, and with
Nymphs; every house, with it Lares, or Familiars; every man, with his
Genius; Hell, with Ghosts, and spirituall Officers, as Charon, Cerberus,
and the Furies; and in the night time, all places with Larvae, Lemures,
Ghosts of men deceased, and a whole kingdome of Fayries, and Bugbears.
They have also ascribed Divinity, and built Temples to meer Accidents,
and Qualities; such as are Time, Night, Day, Peace, Concord, Love,
Contention, Vertue, Honour, Health, Rust, Fever, and the like; which
when they prayed for, or against, they prayed to, as if there were
Ghosts of those names hanging over their heads, and letting fall, or
withholding that Good, or Evill, for, or against which they prayed. They
invoked also their own Wit, by the name of Muses; their own Ignorance,
by the name of Fortune; their own Lust, by the name of Cupid; their
own Rage, by the name Furies; their own privy members by the name of
Priapus; and attributed their pollutions, to Incubi, and Succubae:
insomuch as there was nothing, which a Poet could introduce as a person
in his Poem, which they did not make either a God, or a Divel.

The same authors of the Religion of the Gentiles, observing the second
ground for Religion, which is mens Ignorance of causes; and thereby
their aptnesse to attribute their fortune to causes, on which there
was no dependence at all apparent, took occasion to obtrude on their
ignorance, in stead of second causes, a kind of second and ministeriall
Gods; ascribing the cause of Foecundity, to Venus; the cause of Arts, to
Apollo; of Subtilty and Craft, to Mercury; of Tempests and stormes,
to Aeolus; and of other effects, to other Gods: insomuch as there was
amongst the Heathen almost as great variety of Gods, as of businesse.

And to the Worship, which naturally men conceived fit to bee used
towards their Gods, namely Oblations, Prayers, Thanks, and the rest
formerly named; the same Legislators of the Gentiles have added their
Images, both in Picture, and Sculpture; that the more ignorant sort,
(that is to say, the most part, or generality of the people,) thinking
the Gods for whose representation they were made, were really included,
and as it were housed within them, might so much the more stand in feare
of them: And endowed them with lands, and houses, and officers, and
revenues, set apart from all other humane uses; that is, consecrated,
and made holy to those their Idols; as Caverns, Groves, Woods,
Mountains, and whole Ilands; and have attributed to them, not onely
the shapes, some of Men, some of Beasts, some of Monsters; but also the
Faculties, and Passions of men and beasts; as Sense, Speech, Sex, Lust,
Generation, (and this not onely by mixing one with another, to propagate
the kind of Gods; but also by mixing with men, and women, to beget
mongrill Gods, and but inmates of Heaven, as Bacchus, Hercules,
and others;) besides, Anger, Revenge, and other passions of living
creatures, and the actions proceeding from them, as Fraud, Theft,
Adultery, Sodomie, and any vice that may be taken for an effect of
Power, or a cause of Pleasure; and all such Vices, as amongst men are
taken to be against Law, rather than against Honour.

Lastly, to the Prognostiques of time to come; which are naturally, but
Conjectures upon the Experience of time past; and supernaturall, divine
Revelation; the same authors of the Religion of the Gentiles, partly
upon pretended Experience, partly upon pretended Revelation, have
added innumerable other superstitious wayes of Divination; and made men
believe they should find their fortunes, sometimes in the ambiguous
or senslesse answers of the priests at Delphi, Delos, Ammon, and other
famous Oracles; which answers, were made ambiguous by designe, to own
the event both wayes; or absurd by the intoxicating vapour of the place,
which is very frequent in sulphurous Cavernes: Sometimes in the leaves
of the Sibills; of whose Prophecyes (like those perhaps of Nostradamus;
for the fragments now extant seem to be the invention of later times)
there were some books in reputation in the time of the Roman Republique:
Sometimes in the insignificant Speeches of Mad-men, supposed to
be possessed with a divine Spirit; which Possession they called
Enthusiasme; and these kinds of foretelling events, were accounted
Theomancy, or Prophecy; Sometimes in the aspect of the Starres at their
Nativity; which was called Horoscopy, and esteemed a part of judiciary
Astrology: Sometimes in their own hopes and feares, called Thumomancy,
or Presage: Sometimes in the Prediction of Witches, that pretended
conference with the dead; which is called Necromancy, Conjuring, and
Witchcraft; and is but juggling and confederate knavery: Sometimes in
the Casuall flight, or feeding of birds; called Augury: Sometimes in
the Entrayles of a sacrificed beast; which was Aruspicina: Sometimes
in Dreams: Sometimes in Croaking of Ravens, or chattering of Birds:
Sometimes in the Lineaments of the face; which was called Metoposcopy;
or by Palmistry in the lines of the hand; in casuall words, called
Omina: Sometimes in Monsters, or unusuall accidents; as Ecclipses,
Comets, rare Meteors, Earthquakes, Inundations, uncouth Births, and the
like, which they called Portenta and Ostenta, because they thought them
to portend, or foreshew some great Calamity to come; Sometimes, in meer
Lottery, as Crosse and Pile; counting holes in a sive; dipping of Verses
in Homer, and Virgil; and innumerable other such vaine conceipts. So
easie are men to be drawn to believe any thing, from such men as have
gotten credit with them; and can with gentlenesse, and dexterity, take
hold of their fear, and ignorance.

The Designes Of The Authors Of The Religion Of The Heathen And therefore
the first Founders, and Legislators of Common-wealths amongst the
Gentiles, whose ends were only to keep the people in obedience, and
peace, have in all places taken care; First, to imprint in their minds a
beliefe, that those precepts which they gave concerning Religion, might
not be thought to proceed from their own device, but from the dictates
of some God, or other Spirit; or else that they themselves were of a
higher nature than mere mortalls, that their Lawes might the more easily
be received: So Numa Pompilius pretended to receive the Ceremonies he
instituted amongst the Romans, from the Nymph Egeria: and the first King
and founder of the Kingdome of Peru, pretended himselfe and his wife to
be the children of the Sunne: and Mahomet, to set up his new Religion,
pretended to have conferences with the Holy Ghost, in forme of a Dove.
Secondly, they have had a care, to make it believed, that the same
things were displeasing to the Gods, which were forbidden by the
Lawes. Thirdly, to prescribe Ceremonies, Supplications, Sacrifices, and
Festivalls, by which they were to believe, the anger of the Gods might
be appeased; and that ill success in War, great contagions of Sicknesse,
Earthquakes, and each mans private Misery, came from the Anger of
the Gods; and their Anger from the Neglect of their Worship, or the
forgetting, or mistaking some point of the Ceremonies required. And
though amongst the antient Romans, men were not forbidden to deny, that
which in the Poets is written of the paines, and pleasures after this
life; which divers of great authority, and gravity in that state have
in their Harangues openly derided; yet that beliefe was alwaies more
cherished, than the contrary.

And by these, and such other Institutions, they obtayned in order to
their end, (which was the peace of the Commonwealth,) that the common
people in their misfortunes, laying the fault on neglect, or errour in
their Ceremonies, or on their own disobedience to the lawes, were the
lesse apt to mutiny against their Governors. And being entertained with
the pomp, and pastime of Festivalls, and publike Gomes, made in
honour of the Gods, needed nothing else but bread, to keep them from
discontent, murmuring, and commotion against the State. And therefore
the Romans, that had conquered the greatest part of the then known
World, made no scruple of tollerating any Religion whatsoever in the
City of Rome it selfe; unlesse it had somthing in it, that could not
consist with their Civill Government; nor do we read, that any Religion
was there forbidden, but that of the Jewes; who (being the peculiar
Kingdome of God) thought it unlawfull to acknowledge subjection to any
mortall King or State whatsoever. And thus you see how the Religion of
the Gentiles was a part of their Policy.

The True Religion, And The Lawes Of Gods Kingdome The Same But where God
himselfe, by supernaturall Revelation, planted Religion; there he
also made to himselfe a peculiar Kingdome; and gave Lawes, not only of
behaviour towards himselfe; but also towards one another; and thereby
in the Kingdome of God, the Policy, and lawes Civill, are a part of
Religion; and therefore the distinction of Temporall, and Spirituall
Domination, hath there no place. It is true, that God is King of all the
Earth: Yet may he be King of a peculiar, and chosen Nation. For there is
no more incongruity therein, than that he that hath the generall command
of the whole Army, should have withall a peculiar Regiment, or Company
of his own. God is King of all the Earth by his Power: but of his
chosen people, he is King by Covenant. But to speake more largly of the
Kingdome of God, both by Nature, and Covenant, I have in the following
discourse assigned an other place.




The Causes Of Change In Religion

From the propagation of Religion, it is not hard to understand
the causes of the resolution of the same into its first seeds, or
principles; which are only an opinion of a Deity, and Powers invisible,
and supernaturall; that can never be so abolished out of humane nature,
but that new Religions may againe be made to spring out of them, by the
culture of such men, as for such purpose are in reputation.

For seeing all formed Religion, is founded at first, upon the faith
which a multitude hath in some one person, whom they believe not only to
be a wise man, and to labour to procure their happiness, but also to
be a holy man, to whom God himselfe vouchsafeth to declare his will
supernaturally; It followeth necessarily, when they that have the
Goverment of Religion, shall come to have either the wisedome of those
men, their sincerity, or their love suspected; or that they shall
be unable to shew any probable token of divine Revelation; that the
Religion which they desire to uphold, must be suspected likewise; and
(without the feare of the Civill Sword) contradicted and rejected.




Injoyning Beleefe Of Impossibilities

That which taketh away the reputation of Wisedome, in him that formeth
a Religion, or addeth to it when it is allready formed, is the enjoyning
of a beliefe of contradictories: For both parts of a contradiction
cannot possibly be true: and therefore to enjoyne the beliefe of them,
is an argument of ignorance; which detects the Author in that; and
discredits him in all things else he shall propound as from revelation
supernaturall: which revelation a man may indeed have of many things
above, but of nothing against naturall reason.




Doing Contrary To The Religion They Establish

That which taketh away the reputation of Sincerity, is the doing, or
saying of such things, as appeare to be signes, that what they require
other men to believe, is not believed by themselves; all which doings,
or sayings are therefore called Scandalous, because they be stumbling
blocks, that make men to fall in the way of Religion: as Injustice,
Cruelty, Prophanesse, Avarice, and Luxury. For who can believe, that he
that doth ordinarily such actions, as proceed from any of these
rootes, believeth there is any such Invisible Power to be feared, as he
affrighteth other men withall, for lesser faults?

That which taketh away the reputation of Love, is the being detected of
private ends: as when the beliefe they require of others, conduceth or
seemeth to conduce to the acquiring of Dominion, Riches, Dignity, or
secure Pleasure, to themselves onely, or specially. For that which men
reap benefit by to themselves, they are thought to do for their own
sakes, and not for love of others




Want Of The Testimony Of Miracles

Lastly, the testimony that men can render of divine Calling, can be no
other, than the operation of Miracles; or true Prophecy, (which also is
a Miracle;) or extraordinary Felicity. And therefore, to those points
of Religion, which have been received from them that did such Miracles;
those that are added by such, as approve not their Calling by some
Miracle, obtain no greater beliefe, than what the Custome, and Lawes of
the places, in which they be educated, have wrought into them. For as
in naturall things, men of judgement require naturall signes,
and arguments; so in supernaturall things, they require signes
supernaturall, (which are Miracles,) before they consent inwardly, and
from their hearts.

All which causes of the weakening of mens faith, do manifestly appear
in the Examples following. First, we have the Example of the children
of Israel; who when Moses, that had approved his Calling to them by
Miracles, and by the happy conduct of them out of Egypt, was absent but
40 dayes, revolted from the worship of the true God, recommended to
them by him; and setting up (Exod.32 1,2) a Golden Calfe for their God,
relapsed into the Idolatry of the Egyptians; from whom they had been
so lately delivered. And again, after Moses, Aaron, Joshua, and that
generation which had seen the great works of God in Israel, (Judges
2 11) were dead; another generation arose, and served Baal. So that
Miracles fayling, Faith also failed.

Again, when the sons of Samuel, (1 Sam.8.3) being constituted by their
father Judges in Bersabee, received bribes, and judged unjustly, the
people of Israel refused any more to have God to be their King, in other
manner than he was King of other people; and therefore cryed out to
Samuel, to choose them a King after the manner of the Nations. So that
Justice Fayling, Faith also fayled: Insomuch, as they deposed their God,
from reigning over them.

And whereas in the planting of Christian Religion, the Oracles ceased
in all parts of the Roman Empire, and the number of Christians encreased
wonderfully every day, and in every place, by the preaching of the
Apostles, and Evangelists; a great part of that successe, may reasonably
be attributed, to the contempt, into which the Priests of the Gentiles
of that time, had brought themselves, by their uncleannesse, avarice,
and jugling between Princes. Also the Religion of the Church of Rome,
was partly, for the same cause abolished in England, and many other
parts of Christendome; insomuch, as the fayling of Vertue in the
Pastors, maketh Faith faile in the People: and partly from bringing
of the Philosophy, and doctrine of Aristotle into Religion, by the
Schoole-men; from whence there arose so many contradictions, and
absurdities, as brought the Clergy into a reputation both of Ignorance,
and of Fraudulent intention; and enclined people to revolt from them,
either against the will of their own Princes, as in France, and Holland;
or with their will, as in England.

Lastly, amongst the points by the Church of Rome declared necessary for
Salvation, there be so many, manifestly to the advantage of the Pope,
and of his spirituall subjects, residing in the territories of other
Christian Princes, that were it not for the mutuall emulation of those
Princes, they might without warre, or trouble, exclude all forraign
Authority, as easily as it has been excluded in England. For who is
there that does not see, to whose benefit it conduceth, to have it
believed, that a King hath not his Authority from Christ, unlesse a
Bishop crown him? That a King, if he be a Priest, cannot Marry? That
whether a Prince be born in lawfull Marriage, or not, must be judged by
Authority from Rome? That Subjects may be freed from their Alleageance,
if by the Court of Rome, the King be judged an Heretique? That a King
(as Chilperique of France) may be deposed by a Pope (as Pope Zachary,)
for no cause; and his Kingdome given to one of his Subjects? That the
Clergy, and Regulars, in what Country soever, shall be exempt from the
Jurisdiction of their King, in cases criminall? Or who does not see, to
whose profit redound the Fees of private Masses, and Vales of Purgatory;
with other signes of private interest, enough to mortifie the most
lively Faith, if (as I sayd) the civill Magistrate, and Custome did not
more sustain it, than any opinion they have of the Sanctity, Wisdome,
or Probity of their Teachers? So that I may attribute all the changes
of Religion in the world, to one and the some cause; and that is,
unpleasing Priests; and those not onely amongst Catholiques, but even in
that Church that hath presumed most of Reformation.



CHAPTER XIII. OF THE NATURALL CONDITION OF MANKIND,
AS CONCERNING THEIR FELICITY, AND MISERY


Nature hath made men so equall, in the faculties of body, and mind; as
that though there bee found one man sometimes manifestly stronger
in body, or of quicker mind then another; yet when all is reckoned
together, the difference between man, and man, is not so considerable,
as that one man can thereupon claim to himselfe any benefit, to which
another may not pretend, as well as he. For as to the strength of body,
the weakest has strength enough to kill the strongest, either by secret
machination, or by confederacy with others, that are in the same danger
with himselfe.

And as to the faculties of the mind, (setting aside the arts grounded
upon words, and especially that skill of proceeding upon generall, and
infallible rules, called Science; which very few have, and but in few
things; as being not a native faculty, born with us; nor attained,
(as Prudence,) while we look after somewhat els,) I find yet a greater
equality amongst men, than that of strength. For Prudence, is but
Experience; which equall time, equally bestowes on all men, in those
things they equally apply themselves unto. That which may perhaps make
such equality incredible, is but a vain conceipt of ones owne wisdome,
which almost all men think they have in a greater degree, than the
Vulgar; that is, than all men but themselves, and a few others, whom by
Fame, or for concurring with themselves, they approve. For such is the
nature of men, that howsoever they may acknowledge many others to be
more witty, or more eloquent, or more learned; Yet they will hardly
believe there be many so wise as themselves: For they see their own wit
at hand, and other mens at a distance. But this proveth rather that men
are in that point equall, than unequall. For there is not ordinarily a
greater signe of the equall distribution of any thing, than that every
man is contented with his share.




From Equality Proceeds Diffidence

From this equality of ability, ariseth equality of hope in the attaining
of our Ends. And therefore if any two men desire the same thing, which
neverthelesse they cannot both enjoy, they become enemies; and in the
way to their End, (which is principally their owne conservation, and
sometimes their delectation only,) endeavour to destroy, or subdue one
an other. And from hence it comes to passe, that where an Invader hath
no more to feare, than an other mans single power; if one plant, sow,
build, or possesse a convenient Seat, others may probably be expected to
come prepared with forces united, to dispossesse, and deprive him, not
only of the fruit of his labour, but also of his life, or liberty. And
the Invader again is in the like danger of another.




From Diffidence Warre

And from this diffidence of one another, there is no way for any man to
secure himselfe, so reasonable, as Anticipation; that is, by force, or
wiles, to master the persons of all men he can, so long, till he see no
other power great enough to endanger him: And this is no more than his
own conservation requireth, and is generally allowed. Also because there
be some, that taking pleasure in contemplating their own power in
the acts of conquest, which they pursue farther than their security
requires; if others, that otherwise would be glad to be at ease within
modest bounds, should not by invasion increase their power, they would
not be able, long time, by standing only on their defence, to subsist.
And by consequence, such augmentation of dominion over men, being
necessary to a mans conservation, it ought to be allowed him.

Againe, men have no pleasure, (but on the contrary a great deale of
griefe) in keeping company, where there is no power able to over-awe
them all. For every man looketh that his companion should value him, at
the same rate he sets upon himselfe: And upon all signes of contempt,
or undervaluing, naturally endeavours, as far as he dares (which amongst
them that have no common power, to keep them in quiet, is far enough
to make them destroy each other,) to extort a greater value from his
contemners, by dommage; and from others, by the example.

So that in the nature of man, we find three principall causes of
quarrel. First, Competition; Secondly, Diffidence; Thirdly, Glory.

The first, maketh men invade for Gain; the second, for Safety; and
the third, for Reputation. The first use Violence, to make themselves
Masters of other mens persons, wives, children, and cattell; the second,
to defend them; the third, for trifles, as a word, a smile, a different
opinion, and any other signe of undervalue, either direct in their
Persons, or by reflexion in their Kindred, their Friends, their Nation,
their Profession, or their Name.




Out Of Civil States, There Is Alwayes Warre Of Every One Against Every
One

Hereby it is manifest, that during the time men live without a common
Power to keep them all in awe, they are in that condition which is
called Warre; and such a warre, as is of every man, against every man.
For WARRE, consisteth not in Battell onely, or the act of fighting; but
in a tract of time, wherein the Will to contend by Battell is
sufficiently known: and therefore the notion of Time, is to be
considered in the nature of Warre; as it is in the nature of Weather.
For as the nature of Foule weather, lyeth not in a showre or two of
rain; but in an inclination thereto of many dayes together: So the
nature of War, consisteth not in actuall fighting; but in the known
disposition thereto, during all the time there is no assurance to the
contrary. All other time is PEACE.




The Incommodities Of Such A War

Whatsoever therefore is consequent to a time of Warre, where every man
is Enemy to every man; the same is consequent to the time, wherein men
live without other security, than what their own strength, and their
own invention shall furnish them withall. In such condition, there is
no place for Industry; because the fruit thereof is uncertain; and
consequently no Culture of the Earth; no Navigation, nor use of the
commodities that may be imported by Sea; no commodious Building; no
Instruments of moving, and removing such things as require much force;
no Knowledge of the face of the Earth; no account of Time; no Arts; no
Letters; no Society; and which is worst of all, continuall feare, and
danger of violent death; And the life of man, solitary, poore, nasty,
brutish, and short.

It may seem strange to some man, that has not well weighed these things;
that Nature should thus dissociate, and render men apt to invade,
and destroy one another: and he may therefore, not trusting to this
Inference, made from the Passions, desire perhaps to have the same
confirmed by Experience. Let him therefore consider with himselfe, when
taking a journey, he armes himselfe, and seeks to go well accompanied;
when going to sleep, he locks his dores; when even in his house he
locks his chests; and this when he knows there bee Lawes, and publike
Officers, armed, to revenge all injuries shall bee done him; what
opinion he has of his fellow subjects, when he rides armed; of his
fellow Citizens, when he locks his dores; and of his children, and
servants, when he locks his chests. Does he not there as much accuse
mankind by his actions, as I do by my words? But neither of us accuse
mans nature in it. The Desires, and other Passions of man, are in
themselves no Sin. No more are the Actions, that proceed from those
Passions, till they know a Law that forbids them; which till Lawes be
made they cannot know: nor can any Law be made, till they have agreed
upon the Person that shall make it.

It may peradventure be thought, there was never such a time, nor
condition of warre as this; and I believe it was never generally so,
over all the world: but there are many places, where they live so now.
For the savage people in many places of America, except the government
of small Families, the concord whereof dependeth on naturall lust, have
no government at all; and live at this day in that brutish manner, as
I said before. Howsoever, it may be perceived what manner of life there
would be, where there were no common Power to feare; by the manner of
life, which men that have formerly lived under a peacefull government,
use to degenerate into, in a civill Warre.

But though there had never been any time, wherein particular men were in
a condition of warre one against another; yet in all times, Kings, and
persons of Soveraigne authority, because of their Independency, are
in continuall jealousies, and in the state and posture of Gladiators;
having their weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one another;
that is, their Forts, Garrisons, and Guns upon the Frontiers of their
Kingdomes; and continuall Spyes upon their neighbours; which is a
posture of War. But because they uphold thereby, the Industry of their
Subjects; there does not follow from it, that misery, which accompanies
the Liberty of particular men.




In Such A Warre, Nothing Is Unjust

To this warre of every man against every man, this also is consequent;
that nothing can be Unjust. The notions of Right and Wrong, Justice and
Injustice have there no place. Where there is no common Power, there is
no Law: where no Law, no Injustice. Force, and Fraud, are in warre the
two Cardinall vertues. Justice, and Injustice are none of the Faculties
neither of the Body, nor Mind. If they were, they might be in a man that
were alone in the world, as well as his Senses, and Passions. They
are Qualities, that relate to men in Society, not in Solitude. It is
consequent also to the same condition, that there be no Propriety, no
Dominion, no Mine and Thine distinct; but onely that to be every mans
that he can get; and for so long, as he can keep it. And thus much
for the ill condition, which man by meer Nature is actually placed in;
though with a possibility to come out of it, consisting partly in the
Passions, partly in his Reason.




The Passions That Incline Men To Peace

The Passions that encline men to Peace, are Feare of Death; Desire of
such things as are necessary to commodious living; and a Hope by their
Industry to obtain them. And Reason suggesteth convenient Articles of
Peace, upon which men may be drawn to agreement. These Articles, are
they, which otherwise are called the Lawes of Nature: whereof I shall
speak more particularly, in the two following Chapters.



CHAPTER XIV. OF THE FIRST AND SECOND NATURALL LAWES, AND OF CONTRACTS




Right Of Nature What

The RIGHT OF NATURE, which Writers commonly call Jus Naturale, is the
Liberty each man hath, to use his own power, as he will himselfe, for
the preservation of his own Nature; that is to say, of his own Life;
and consequently, of doing any thing, which in his own Judgement, and
Reason, hee shall conceive to be the aptest means thereunto.




Liberty What

By LIBERTY, is understood, according to the proper signification of the
word, the absence of externall Impediments: which Impediments, may oft
take away part of a mans power to do what hee would; but cannot hinder
him from using the power left him, according as his judgement, and
reason shall dictate to him.




A Law Of Nature What

A LAW OF NATURE, (Lex Naturalis,) is a Precept, or generall Rule,
found out by Reason, by which a man is forbidden to do, that, which
is destructive of his life, or taketh away the means of preserving the
same; and to omit, that, by which he thinketh it may be best preserved.
For though they that speak of this subject, use to confound Jus, and
Lex, Right and Law; yet they ought to be distinguished; because RIGHT,
consisteth in liberty to do, or to forbeare; Whereas LAW, determineth,
and bindeth to one of them: so that Law, and Right, differ as much,
as Obligation, and Liberty; which in one and the same matter are
inconsistent.




Naturally Every Man Has Right To Everything

And because the condition of Man, (as hath been declared in the
precedent Chapter) is a condition of Warre of every one against every
one; in which case every one is governed by his own Reason; and there
is nothing he can make use of, that may not be a help unto him, in
preserving his life against his enemyes; It followeth, that in such a
condition, every man has a Right to every thing; even to one anothers
body. And therefore, as long as this naturall Right of every man to
every thing endureth, there can be no security to any man, (how strong
or wise soever he be,) of living out the time, which Nature ordinarily
alloweth men to live.




The Fundamental Law Of Nature

And consequently it is a precept, or generall rule of Reason, "That
every man, ought to endeavour Peace, as farre as he has hope of
obtaining it; and when he cannot obtain it, that he may seek, and use,
all helps, and advantages of Warre." The first branch, of which Rule,
containeth the first, and Fundamentall Law of Nature; which is, "To seek
Peace, and follow it." The Second, the summe of the Right of Nature;
which is, "By all means we can, to defend our selves."




The Second Law Of Nature

From this Fundamentall Law of Nature, by which men are commanded to
endeavour Peace, is derived this second Law; "That a man be willing,
when others are so too, as farre-forth, as for Peace, and defence of
himselfe he shall think it necessary, to lay down this right to all
things; and be contented with so much liberty against other men, as
he would allow other men against himselfe." For as long as every man
holdeth this Right, of doing any thing he liketh; so long are all men in
the condition of Warre. But if other men will not lay down their Right,
as well as he; then there is no Reason for any one, to devest himselfe
of his: For that were to expose himselfe to Prey, (which no man is bound
to) rather than to dispose himselfe to Peace. This is that Law of the
Gospell; "Whatsoever you require that others should do to you, that do
ye to them." And that Law of all men, "Quod tibi feiri non vis, alteri
ne feceris."




What it is to lay down a Right

To Lay Downe a mans Right to any thing, is to Devest himselfe of the
Liberty, of hindring another of the benefit of his own Right to the
same. For he that renounceth, or passeth away his Right, giveth not to
any other man a Right which he had not before; because there is nothing
to which every man had not Right by Nature: but onely standeth out of
his way, that he may enjoy his own originall Right, without hindrance
from him; not without hindrance from another. So that the effect which
redoundeth to one man, by another mans defect of Right, is but so much
diminution of impediments to the use of his own Right originall.




Renouncing (or) Transferring Right What; Obligation Duty Justice

Right is layd aside, either by simply Renouncing it; or by Transferring
it to another. By Simply RENOUNCING; when he cares not to whom the
benefit thereof redoundeth. By TRANSFERRING; when he intendeth the
benefit thereof to some certain person, or persons. And when a man hath
in either manner abandoned, or granted away his Right; then is he said
to be OBLIGED, or BOUND, not to hinder those, to whom such Right is
granted, or abandoned, from the benefit of it: and that he Ought, and it
his DUTY, not to make voyd that voluntary act of his own: and that such
hindrance is INJUSTICE, and INJURY, as being Sine Jure; the Right being
before renounced, or transferred. So that Injury, or Injustice, in
the controversies of the world, is somewhat like to that, which in the
disputations of Scholers is called Absurdity. For as it is there called
an Absurdity, to contradict what one maintained in the Beginning: so in
the world, it is called Injustice, and Injury, voluntarily to undo that,
which from the beginning he had voluntarily done. The way by which a man
either simply Renounceth, or Transferreth his Right, is a Declaration,
or Signification, by some voluntary and sufficient signe, or signes,
that he doth so Renounce, or Transferre; or hath so Renounced, or
Transferred the same, to him that accepteth it. And these Signes are
either Words onely, or Actions onely; or (as it happeneth most often)
both Words and Actions. And the same are the BONDS, by which men are
bound, and obliged: Bonds, that have their strength, not from their own
Nature, (for nothing is more easily broken then a mans word,) but from
Feare of some evill consequence upon the rupture.




Not All Rights Are Alienable

Whensoever a man Transferreth his Right, or Renounceth it; it is either
in consideration of some Right reciprocally transferred to himselfe; or
for some other good he hopeth for thereby. For it is a voluntary act:
and of the voluntary acts of every man, the object is some Good To
Himselfe. And therefore there be some Rights, which no man can be
understood by any words, or other signes, to have abandoned, or
transferred. As first a man cannot lay down the right of resisting them,
that assault him by force, to take away his life; because he cannot be
understood to ayme thereby, at any Good to himselfe. The same may be
sayd of Wounds, and Chayns, and Imprisonment; both because there is
no benefit consequent to such patience; as there is to the patience of
suffering another to be wounded, or imprisoned: as also because a man
cannot tell, when he seeth men proceed against him by violence, whether
they intend his death or not. And lastly the motive, and end for which
this renouncing, and transferring or Right is introduced, is nothing
else but the security of a mans person, in his life, and in the means of
so preserving life, as not to be weary of it. And therefore if a man by
words, or other signes, seem to despoyle himselfe of the End, for which
those signes were intended; he is not to be understood as if he meant
it, or that it was his will; but that he was ignorant of how such words
and actions were to be interpreted.




Contract What

The mutuall transferring of Right, is that which men call CONTRACT.

There is difference, between transferring of Right to the Thing; and
transferring, or tradition, that is, delivery of the Thing it selfe. For
the Thing may be delivered together with the Translation of the Right;
as in buying and selling with ready mony; or exchange of goods, or
lands: and it may be delivered some time after.




Covenant What

Again, one of the Contractors, may deliver the Thing contracted for on
his part, and leave the other to perform his part at some determinate
time after, and in the mean time be trusted; and then the Contract on
his part, is called PACT, or COVENANT: Or both parts may contract now,
to performe hereafter: in which cases, he that is to performe in time
to come, being trusted, his performance is called Keeping Of Promise, or
Faith; and the fayling of performance (if it be voluntary) Violation Of
Faith.




Free-gift

When the transferring of Right, is not mutuall; but one of the parties
transferreth, in hope to gain thereby friendship, or service from
another, or from his friends; or in hope to gain the reputation of
Charity, or Magnanimity; or to deliver his mind from the pain of
compassion; or in hope of reward in heaven; This is not Contract, but
GIFT, FREEGIFT, GRACE: which words signifie one and the same thing.




Signes Of Contract Expresse

Signes of Contract, are either Expresse, or By Inference. Expresse, are
words spoken with understanding of what they signifie; And such words
are either of the time Present, or Past; as, I Give, I Grant, I Have
Given, I Have Granted, I Will That This Be Yours: Or of the future;
as, I Will Give, I Will Grant; which words of the future, are called
Promise.




Signes Of Contract By Inference

Signes by Inference, are sometimes the consequence of Words; sometimes
the consequence of Silence; sometimes the consequence of Actions;
sometimes the consequence of Forbearing an Action: and generally a signe
by Inference, of any Contract, is whatsoever sufficiently argues the
will of the Contractor.




Free Gift Passeth By Words Of The Present Or Past

Words alone, if they be of the time to come, and contain a bare promise,
are an insufficient signe of a Free-gift and therefore not obligatory.
For if they be of the time to Come, as, To Morrow I Will Give, they
are a signe I have not given yet, and consequently that my right is not
transferred, but remaineth till I transferre it by some other Act. But
if the words be of the time Present, or Past, as, "I have given, or do
give to be delivered to morrow," then is my to morrows Right given away
to day; and that by the vertue of the words, though there were no
other argument of my will. And there is a great difference in the
signification of these words, Volos Hoc Tuum Esse Cras, and Cros Dabo;
that is between "I will that this be thine to morrow," and, "I will
give it to thee to morrow:" For the word I Will, in the former manner
of speech, signifies an act of the will Present; but in the later, it
signifies a promise of an act of the will to Come: and therefore the
former words, being of the Present, transferre a future right; the
later, that be of the Future, transferre nothing. But if there be other
signes of the Will to transferre a Right, besides Words; then, though
the gift be Free, yet may the Right be understood to passe by words of
the future: as if a man propound a Prize to him that comes first to the
end of a race, The gift is Free; and though the words be of the
Future, yet the Right passeth: for if he would not have his words so be
understood, he should not have let them runne.

Signes Of Contract Are Words Both Of The Past, Present, and Future In
Contracts, the right passeth, not onely where the words are of the time
Present, or Past; but also where they are of the Future; because all
Contract is mutuall translation, or change of Right; and therefore he
that promiseth onely, because he hath already received the benefit for
which he promiseth, is to be understood as if he intended the Right
should passe: for unlesse he had been content to have his words so
understood, the other would not have performed his part first. And
for that cause, in buying, and selling, and other acts of Contract, A
Promise is equivalent to a Covenant; and therefore obligatory.




Merit What

He that performeth first in the case of a Contract, is said to MERIT
that which he is to receive by the performance of the other; and he hath
it as Due. Also when a Prize is propounded to many, which is to be given
to him onely that winneth; or mony is thrown amongst many, to be enjoyed
by them that catch it; though this be a Free Gift; yet so to Win, or
so to Catch, is to Merit, and to have it as DUE. For the Right is
transferred in the Propounding of the Prize, and in throwing down the
mony; though it be not determined to whom, but by the Event of the
contention. But there is between these two sorts of Merit, this
difference, that In Contract, I Merit by vertue of my own power, and the
Contractors need; but in this case of Free Gift, I am enabled to
Merit onely by the benignity of the Giver; In Contract, I merit at The
Contractors hand that hee should depart with his right; In this case of
gift, I Merit not that the giver should part with his right; but that
when he has parted with it, it should be mine, rather than anothers.
And this I think to be the meaning of that distinction of the Schooles,
between Meritum Congrui, and Meritum Condigni. For God Almighty, having
promised Paradise to those men (hoodwinkt with carnall desires,) that
can walk through this world according to the Precepts, and Limits
prescribed by him; they say, he that shall so walk, shall Merit Paradise
Ex Congruo. But because no man can demand a right to it, by his own
Righteousnesse, or any other power in himselfe, but by the Free Grace of
God onely; they say, no man can Merit Paradise Ex Condigno. This I say,
I think is the meaning of that distinction; but because Disputers do not
agree upon the signification of their own termes of Art, longer than it
serves their turn; I will not affirme any thing of their meaning:
onely this I say; when a gift is given indefinitely, as a prize to be
contended for, he that winneth Meriteth, and may claime the Prize as
Due.




Covenants Of Mutuall Trust, When Invalid

If a Covenant be made, wherein neither of the parties performe
presently, but trust one another; in the condition of meer Nature,
(which is a condition of Warre of every man against every man,) upon
any reasonable suspition, it is Voyd; But if there be a common Power set
over them bothe, with right and force sufficient to compell performance;
it is not Voyd. For he that performeth first, has no assurance the other
will performe after; because the bonds of words are too weak to bridle
mens ambition, avarice, anger, and other Passions, without the feare of
some coerceive Power; which in the condition of meer Nature, where all
men are equall, and judges of the justnesse of their own fears cannot
possibly be supposed. And therefore he which performeth first, does
but betray himselfe to his enemy; contrary to the Right (he can never
abandon) of defending his life, and means of living.

But in a civill estate, where there is a Power set up to constrain
those that would otherwise violate their faith, that feare is no more
reasonable; and for that cause, he which by the Covenant is to perform
first, is obliged so to do.

The cause of Feare, which maketh such a Covenant invalid, must be
alwayes something arising after the Covenant made; as some new fact,
or other signe of the Will not to performe; else it cannot make the
Covenant Voyd. For that which could not hinder a man from promising,
ought not to be admitted as a hindrance of performing.




Right To The End, Containeth Right To The Means

He that transferreth any Right, transferreth the Means of enjoying it,
as farre as lyeth in his power. As he that selleth Land, is understood
to transferre the Herbage, and whatsoever growes upon it; Nor can he
that sells a Mill turn away the Stream that drives it. And they that
give to a man The Right of government in Soveraignty, are understood
to give him the right of levying mony to maintain Souldiers; and of
appointing Magistrates for the administration of Justice.




No Covenant With Beasts

To make Covenant with bruit Beasts, is impossible; because not
understanding our speech, they understand not, nor accept of any
translation of Right; nor can translate any Right to another; and
without mutuall acceptation, there is no Covenant.




Nor With God Without Speciall Revelation

To make Covenant with God, is impossible, but by Mediation of such
as God speaketh to, either by Revelation supernaturall, or by his
Lieutenants that govern under him, and in his Name; For otherwise we
know not whether our Covenants be accepted, or not. And therefore they
that Vow any thing contrary to any law of Nature, Vow in vain; as being
a thing unjust to pay such Vow. And if it be a thing commanded by the
Law of Nature, it is not the Vow, but the Law that binds them.




No Covenant, But Of Possible And Future

The matter, or subject of a Covenant, is alwayes something that falleth
under deliberation; (For to Covenant, is an act of the Will; that is to
say an act, and the last act, of deliberation;) and is therefore alwayes
understood to be something to come; and which is judged Possible for him
that Covenanteth, to performe.

And therefore, to promise that which is known to be Impossible, is no
Covenant. But if that prove impossible afterwards, which before was
thought possible, the Covenant is valid, and bindeth, (though not to the
thing it selfe,) yet to the value; or, if that also be impossible, to
the unfeigned endeavour of performing as much as is possible; for to
more no man can be obliged.




Covenants How Made Voyd

Men are freed of their Covenants two wayes; by Performing; or by being
Forgiven. For Performance, is the naturall end of obligation; and
Forgivenesse, the restitution of liberty; as being a retransferring of
that Right, in which the obligation consisted.




Covenants Extorted By Feare Are Valide

Covenants entred into by fear, in the condition of meer Nature, are
obligatory. For example, if I Covenant to pay a ransome, or service for
my life, to an enemy; I am bound by it. For it is a Contract, wherein
one receiveth the benefit of life; the other is to receive mony,
or service for it; and consequently, where no other Law (as in the
condition, of meer Nature) forbiddeth the performance, the Covenant
is valid. Therefore Prisoners of warre, if trusted with the payment of
their Ransome, are obliged to pay it; And if a weaker Prince, make a
disadvantageous peace with a stronger, for feare; he is bound to keep
it; unlesse (as hath been sayd before) there ariseth some new, and just
cause of feare, to renew the war. And even in Common-wealths, if I be
forced to redeem my selfe from a Theefe by promising him mony, I am
bound to pay it, till the Civill Law discharge me. For whatsoever I may
lawfully do without Obligation, the same I may lawfully Covenant to do
through feare: and what I lawfully Covenant, I cannot lawfully break.




The Former Covenant To One, Makes Voyd The Later To Another

A former Covenant, makes voyd a later. For a man that hath passed away
his Right to one man to day, hath it not to passe to morrow to another:
and therefore the later promise passeth no Right, but is null.




A Mans Covenant Not To Defend Himselfe, Is Voyd

A Covenant not to defend my selfe from force, by force, is alwayes voyd.
For (as I have shewed before) no man can transferre, or lay down his
Right to save himselfe from Death, Wounds, and Imprisonment, (the
avoyding whereof is the onely End of laying down any Right,)
and therefore the promise of not resisting force, in no Covenant
transferreth any right; nor is obliging. For though a man may Covenant
thus, "Unlesse I do so, or so, kill me;" he cannot Covenant thus "Unless
I do so, or so, I will not resist you, when you come to kill me." For
man by nature chooseth the lesser evill, which is danger of death in
resisting; rather than the greater, which is certain and present death
in not resisting. And this is granted to be true by all men, in
that they lead Criminals to Execution, and Prison, with armed men,
notwithstanding that such Criminals have consented to the Law, by which
they are condemned.




No Man Obliged To Accuse Himselfe

A Covenant to accuse ones Selfe, without assurance of pardon, is
likewise invalide. For in the condition of Nature, where every man is
Judge, there is no place for Accusation: and in the Civill State, the
Accusation is followed with Punishment; which being Force, a man is
not obliged not to resist. The same is also true, of the Accusation of
those, by whose Condemnation a man falls into misery; as of a Father,
Wife, or Benefactor. For the Testimony of such an Accuser, if it be not
willingly given, is praesumed to be corrupted by Nature; and therefore
not to be received: and where a mans Testimony is not to be credited,
his not bound to give it. Also Accusations upon Torture, are not to
be reputed as Testimonies. For Torture is to be used but as means of
conjecture, and light, in the further examination, and search of truth;
and what is in that case confessed, tendeth to the ease of him that is
Tortured; not to the informing of the Torturers: and therefore ought
not to have the credit of a sufficient Testimony: for whether he deliver
himselfe by true, or false Accusation, he does it by the Right of
preserving his own life.




The End Of An Oath; The Forme Of As Oath

The force of Words, being (as I have formerly noted) too weak to hold
men to the performance of their Covenants; there are in mans nature, but
two imaginable helps to strengthen it. And those are either a Feare
of the consequence of breaking their word; or a Glory, or Pride in
appearing not to need to breake it. This later is a Generosity too
rarely found to be presumed on, especially in the pursuers of Wealth,
Command, or sensuall Pleasure; which are the greatest part of Mankind.
The Passion to be reckoned upon, is Fear; whereof there be two very
generall Objects: one, the Power of Spirits Invisible; the other, the
Power of those men they shall therein Offend. Of these two, though the
former be the greater Power, yet the feare of the later is commonly
the greater Feare. The Feare of the former is in every man, his own
Religion: which hath place in the nature of man before Civill Society.
The later hath not so; at least not place enough, to keep men to their
promises; because in the condition of meer Nature, the inequality of
Power is not discerned, but by the event of Battell. So that before the
time of Civill Society, or in the interruption thereof by Warre, there
is nothing can strengthen a Covenant of Peace agreed on, against the
temptations of Avarice, Ambition, Lust, or other strong desire, but the
feare of that Invisible Power, which they every one Worship as God; and
Feare as a Revenger of their perfidy. All therefore that can be done
between two men not subject to Civill Power, is to put one another
to swear by the God he feareth: Which Swearing or OATH, is a Forme Of
Speech, Added To A Promise; By Which He That Promiseth, Signifieth, That
Unlesse He Performe, He Renounceth The Mercy Of His God, Or Calleth To
Him For Vengeance On Himselfe. Such was the Heathen Forme, "Let Jupiter
kill me else, as I kill this Beast." So is our Forme, "I shall do thus,
and thus, so help me God." And this, with the Rites and Ceremonies,
which every one useth in his own Religion, that the feare of breaking
faith might be the greater.




No Oath, But By God

By this it appears, that an Oath taken according to any other Forme, or
Rite, then his, that sweareth, is in vain; and no Oath: And there is no
Swearing by any thing which the Swearer thinks not God. For though men
have sometimes used to swear by their Kings, for feare, or flattery; yet
they would have it thereby understood, they attributed to them Divine
honour. And that Swearing unnecessarily by God, is but prophaning of his
name: and Swearing by other things, as men do in common discourse, is
not Swearing, but an impious Custome, gotten by too much vehemence of
talking.




An Oath Addes Nothing To The Obligation

It appears also, that the Oath addes nothing to the Obligation. For a
Covenant, if lawfull, binds in the sight of God, without the Oath,
as much as with it; if unlawfull, bindeth not at all; though it be
confirmed with an Oath.



CHAPTER XV. OF OTHER LAWES OF NATURE




The Third Law Of Nature, Justice

From that law of Nature, by which we are obliged to transferre to
another, such Rights, as being retained, hinder the peace of Mankind,
there followeth a Third; which is this, That Men Performe Their
Covenants Made: without which, Covenants are in vain, and but Empty
words; and the Right of all men to all things remaining, wee are still
in the condition of Warre.




Justice And Injustice What

And in this law of Nature, consisteth the Fountain and Originall of
JUSTICE. For where no Covenant hath preceded, there hath no Right been
transferred, and every man has right to every thing; and consequently,
no action can be Unjust. But when a Covenant is made, then to break it
is Unjust: And the definition of INJUSTICE, is no other than The Not
Performance Of Covenant. And whatsoever is not Unjust, is Just.

Justice And Propriety Begin With The Constitution of Common-wealth
But because Covenants of mutuall trust, where there is a feare of not
performance on either part, (as hath been said in the former Chapter,)
are invalid; though the Originall of Justice be the making of Covenants;
yet Injustice actually there can be none, till the cause of such feare
be taken away; which while men are in the naturall condition of Warre,
cannot be done. Therefore before the names of Just, and Unjust can have
place, there must be some coercive Power, to compell men equally to
the performance of their Covenants, by the terrour of some punishment,
greater than the benefit they expect by the breach of their Covenant;
and to make good that Propriety, which by mutuall Contract men acquire,
in recompence of the universall Right they abandon: and such power there
is none before the erection of a Common-wealth. And this is also to be
gathered out of the ordinary definition of Justice in the Schooles: For
they say, that "Justice is the constant Will of giving to every man his
own." And therefore where there is no Own, that is, no Propriety, there
is no Injustice; and where there is no coerceive Power erected, that is,
where there is no Common-wealth, there is no Propriety; all men having
Right to all things: Therefore where there is no Common-wealth, there
nothing is Unjust. So that the nature of Justice, consisteth in keeping
of valid Covenants: but the Validity of Covenants begins not but with
the Constitution of a Civill Power, sufficient to compell men to keep
them: And then it is also that Propriety begins.




Justice Not Contrary To Reason

The Foole hath sayd in his heart, there is no such thing as Justice;
and sometimes also with his tongue; seriously alleaging, that every mans
conservation, and contentment, being committed to his own care, there
could be no reason, why every man might not do what he thought conduced
thereunto; and therefore also to make, or not make; keep, or not keep
Covenants, was not against Reason, when it conduced to ones benefit.
He does not therein deny, that there be Covenants; and that they are
sometimes broken, sometimes kept; and that such breach of them may
be called Injustice, and the observance of them Justice: but he
questioneth, whether Injustice, taking away the feare of God, (for the
same Foole hath said in his heart there is no God,) may not sometimes
stand with that Reason, which dictateth to every man his own good; and
particularly then, when it conduceth to such a benefit, as shall put a
man in a condition, to neglect not onely the dispraise, and revilings,
but also the power of other men. The Kingdome of God is gotten by
violence; but what if it could be gotten by unjust violence? were it
against Reason so to get it, when it is impossible to receive hurt by
it? and if it be not against Reason, it is not against Justice; or else
Justice is not to be approved for good. From such reasoning as this,
Succesfull wickednesse hath obtained the Name of Vertue; and some that
in all other things have disallowed the violation of Faith; yet have
allowed it, when it is for the getting of a Kingdome. And the Heathen
that believed, that Saturn was deposed by his son Jupiter, believed
neverthelesse the same Jupiter to be the avenger of Injustice: Somewhat
like to a piece of Law in Cokes Commentaries on Litleton; where he
sayes, If the right Heire of the Crown be attainted of Treason; yet the
Crown shall descend to him, and Eo Instante the Atteynder be voyd; From
which instances a man will be very prone to inferre; that when the Heire
apparent of a Kingdome, shall kill him that is in possession, though his
father; you may call it Injustice, or by what other name you will; yet
it can never be against Reason, seeing all the voluntary actions of
men tend to the benefit of themselves; and those actions are most
Reasonable, that conduce most to their ends. This specious reasoning is
nevertheless false.

For the question is not of promises mutuall, where there is no security
of performance on either side; as when there is no Civill Power erected
over the parties promising; for such promises are no Covenants: But
either where one of the parties has performed already; or where there
is a Power to make him performe; there is the question whether it be
against reason, that is, against the benefit of the other to performe,
or not. And I say it is not against reason. For the manifestation
whereof, we are to consider; First, that when a man doth a thing, which
notwithstanding any thing can be foreseen, and reckoned on, tendeth to
his own destruction, howsoever some accident which he could not expect,
arriving may turne it to his benefit; yet such events do not make it
reasonably or wisely done. Secondly, that in a condition of Warre,
wherein every man to every man, for want of a common Power to keep them
all in awe, is an Enemy, there is no man can hope by his own strength,
or wit, to defend himselfe from destruction, without the help
of Confederates; where every one expects the same defence by the
Confederation, that any one else does: and therefore he which declares
he thinks it reason to deceive those that help him, can in reason expect
no other means of safety, than what can be had from his own single
Power. He therefore that breaketh his Covenant, and consequently
declareth that he thinks he may with reason do so, cannot be received
into any Society, that unite themselves for Peace and defence, but
by the errour of them that receive him; nor when he is received, be
retayned in it, without seeing the danger of their errour; which errours
a man cannot reasonably reckon upon as the means of his security; and
therefore if he be left, or cast out of Society, he perisheth; and if he
live in Society, it is by the errours of other men, which he could not
foresee, nor reckon upon; and consequently against the reason of his
preservation; and so, as all men that contribute not to his destruction,
forbear him onely out of ignorance of what is good for themselves.

As for the Instance of gaining the secure and perpetuall felicity of
Heaven, by any way; it is frivolous: there being but one way imaginable;
and that is not breaking, but keeping of Covenant.

And for the other Instance of attaining Soveraignty by Rebellion; it is
manifest, that though the event follow, yet because it cannot reasonably
be expected, but rather the contrary; and because by gaining it so,
others are taught to gain the same in like manner, the attempt thereof
is against reason. Justice therefore, that is to say, Keeping of
Covenant, is a Rule of Reason, by which we are forbidden to do any thing
destructive to our life; and consequently a Law of Nature.

There be some that proceed further; and will not have the Law of Nature,
to be those Rules which conduce to the preservation of mans life on
earth; but to the attaining of an eternall felicity after death; to
which they think the breach of Covenant may conduce; and consequently
be just and reasonable; (such are they that think it a work of merit
to kill, or depose, or rebell against, the Soveraigne Power constituted
over them by their own consent.) But because there is no naturall
knowledge of mans estate after death; much lesse of the reward that is
then to be given to breach of Faith; but onely a beliefe grounded upon
other mens saying, that they know it supernaturally, or that they know
those, that knew them, that knew others, that knew it supernaturally;
Breach of Faith cannot be called a Precept of Reason, or Nature.




Covenants Not Discharged By The Vice Of The Person To Whom Made

Others, that allow for a Law of Nature, the keeping of Faith, do
neverthelesse make exception of certain persons; as Heretiques, and
such as use not to performe their Covenant to others: And this also is
against reason. For if any fault of a man, be sufficient to discharge
our Covenant made; the same ought in reason to have been sufficient to
have hindred the making of it.




Justice Of Men, And Justice Of Actions What

The names of Just, and Unjust, when they are attributed to Men, signifie
one thing; and when they are attributed to Actions, another. When they
are attributed to Men, they signifie Conformity, or Inconformity of
Manners, to Reason. But when they are attributed to Actions, they
signifie the Conformity, or Inconformity to Reason, not of Manners, or
manner of life, but of particular Actions. A Just man therefore, is he
that taketh all the care he can, that his Actions may be all Just: and
an Unjust man, is he that neglecteth it. And such men are more often
in our Language stiled by the names of Righteous, and Unrighteous; then
Just, and Unjust; though the meaning be the same. Therefore a Righteous
man, does not lose that Title, by one, or a few unjust Actions, that
proceed from sudden Passion, or mistake of Things, or Persons: nor does
an Unrighteous man, lose his character, for such Actions, as he does,
of forbeares to do, for feare: because his Will is not framed by the
Justice, but by the apparant benefit of what he is to do. That which
gives to humane Actions the relish of Justice, is a certain Noblenesse
or Gallantnesse of courage, (rarely found,) by which a man scorns to
be beholding for the contentment of his life, to fraud, or breach of
promise. This Justice of the Manners, is that which is meant, where
Justice is called a Vertue; and Injustice a Vice.

But the Justice of Actions denominates men, not Just, but Guiltlesse;
and the Injustice of the same, (which is also called Injury,) gives them
but the name of Guilty.




Justice Of Manners, And Justice Of Actions

Again, the Injustice of Manners, is the disposition, or aptitude to
do Injurie; and is Injustice before it proceed to Act; and without
supposing any individuall person injured. But the Injustice of an
Action, (that is to say Injury,) supposeth an individuall person
Injured; namely him, to whom the Covenant was made: And therefore many
times the injury is received by one man, when the dammage redoundeth
to another. As when The Master commandeth his servant to give mony to a
stranger; if it be not done, the Injury is done to the Master, whom
he had before Covenanted to obey; but the dammage redoundeth to the
stranger, to whom he had no Obligation; and therefore could not Injure
him. And so also in Common-wealths, private men may remit to one another
their debts; but not robberies or other violences, whereby they are
endammaged; because the detaining of Debt, is an Injury to themselves;
but Robbery and Violence, are Injuries to the Person of the
Common-wealth.




Nothing Done To A Man, By His Own Consent Can Be Injury

Whatsoever is done to a man, conformable to his own Will signified to
the doer, is no Injury to him. For if he that doeth it, hath not passed
away his originall right to do what he please, by some Antecedent
Covenant, there is no breach of Covenant; and therefore no Injury done
him. And if he have; then his Will to have it done being signified, is a
release of that Covenant; and so again there is no Injury done him.




Justice Commutative, And Distributive

Justice of Actions, is by Writers divided into Commutative, and
Distributive; and the former they say consisteth in proportion
Arithmeticall; the later in proportion Geometricall. Commutative
therefore, they place in the equality of value of the things contracted
for; And Distributive, in the distribution of equall benefit, to men of
equall merit. As if it were Injustice to sell dearer than we buy; or to
give more to a man than he merits. The value of all things contracted
for, is measured by the Appetite of the Contractors: and therefore the
just value, is that which they be contented to give. And Merit (besides
that which is by Covenant, where the performance on one part, meriteth
the performance of the other part, and falls under Justice Commutative,
not Distributive,) is not due by Justice; but is rewarded of Grace
onely. And therefore this distinction, in the sense wherein it useth to
be expounded, is not right. To speak properly, Commutative Justice,
is the Justice of a Contractor; that is, a Performance of Covenant,
in Buying, and Selling; Hiring, and Letting to Hire; Lending, and
Borrowing; Exchanging, Bartering, and other acts of Contract.

And Distributive Justice, the Justice of an Arbitrator; that is to say,
the act of defining what is Just. Wherein, (being trusted by them that
make him Arbitrator,) if he performe his Trust, he is said to distribute
to every man his own: and his is indeed Just Distribution, and may
be called (though improperly) Distributive Justice; but more properly
Equity; which also is a Law of Nature, as shall be shewn in due place.




The Fourth Law Of Nature, Gratitude

As Justice dependeth on Antecedent Covenant; so does Gratitude depend
on Antecedent Grace; that is to say, Antecedent Free-gift: and is the
fourth Law of Nature; which may be conceived in this Forme, "That a man
which receiveth Benefit from another of meer Grace, Endeavour that he
which giveth it, have no reasonable cause to repent him of his good
will." For no man giveth, but with intention of Good to himselfe;
because Gift is Voluntary; and of all Voluntary Acts, the Object is to
every man his own Good; of which if men see they shall be frustrated,
there will be no beginning of benevolence, or trust; nor consequently of
mutuall help; nor of reconciliation of one man to another; and therefore
they are to remain still in the condition of War; which is contrary to
the first and Fundamentall Law of Nature, which commandeth men to Seek
Peace. The breach of this Law, is called Ingratitude; and hath the same
relation to Grace, that Injustice hath to Obligation by Covenant.




The Fifth, Mutuall accommodation, or Compleasance

A fifth Law of Nature, is COMPLEASANCE; that is to say, "That every
man strive to accommodate himselfe to the rest." For the understanding
whereof, we may consider, that there is in mens aptnesse to Society;
a diversity of Nature, rising from their diversity of Affections; not
unlike to that we see in stones brought together for building of an
Aedifice. For as that stone which by the asperity, and irregularity of
Figure, takes more room from others, than it selfe fills; and for
the hardnesse, cannot be easily made plain, and thereby hindereth the
building, is by the builders cast away as unprofitable, and troublesome:
so also, a man that by asperity of Nature, will strive to retain those
things which to himselfe are superfluous, and to others necessary; and
for the stubbornness of his Passions, cannot be corrected, is to be
left, or cast out of Society, as combersome thereunto. For seeing every
man, not onely by Right, but also by necessity of Nature, is supposed
to endeavour all he can, to obtain that which is necessary for his
conservation; He that shall oppose himselfe against it, for things
superfluous, is guilty of the warre that thereupon is to follow; and
therefore doth that, which is contrary to the fundamentall Law of
Nature, which commandeth To Seek Peace. The observers of this Law,
may be called SOCIABLE, (the Latines call them Commodi;) The contrary,
Stubborn, Insociable, Froward, Intractable.




The Sixth, Facility To Pardon

A sixth Law of Nature is this, "That upon caution of the Future time,
a man ought to pardon the offences past of them that repenting, desire
it." For PARDON, is nothing but granting of Peace; which though granted
to them that persevere in their hostility, be not Peace, but Feare; yet
not granted to them that give caution of the Future time, is signe of an
aversion to Peace; and therefore contrary to the Law of Nature.




The Seventh, That In Revenges, Men Respect Onely The Future Good

A seventh is, " That in Revenges, (that is, retribution of evil for
evil,) Men look not at the greatnesse of the evill past, but the
greatnesse of the good to follow." Whereby we are forbidden to inflict
punishment with any other designe, than for correction of the offender,
or direction of others. For this Law is consequent to the next before
it, that commandeth Pardon, upon security of the Future Time. Besides,
Revenge without respect to the Example, and profit to come, is a
triumph, or glorying in the hurt of another, tending to no end; (for the
End is alwayes somewhat to Come;) and glorying to no end, is vain-glory,
and contrary to reason; and to hurt without reason, tendeth to the
introduction of Warre; which is against the Law of Nature; and is
commonly stiled by the name of Cruelty.




The Eighth, Against Contumely

And because all signes of hatred, or contempt, provoke to fight;
insomuch as most men choose rather to hazard their life, than not to be
revenged; we may in the eighth place, for a Law of Nature set down this
Precept, "That no man by deed, word, countenance, or gesture, declare
Hatred, or Contempt of another." The breach of which Law, is commonly
called Contumely.




The Ninth, Against Pride

The question who is the better man, has no place in the condition of
meer Nature; where, (as has been shewn before,) all men are equall. The
inequallity that now is, has been introduced by the Lawes civill. I know
that Aristotle in the first booke of his Politiques, for a foundation of
his doctrine, maketh men by Nature, some more worthy to Command, meaning
the wiser sort (such as he thought himselfe to be for his Philosophy;)
others to Serve, (meaning those that had strong bodies, but were not
Philosophers as he;) as if Master and Servant were not introduced by
consent of men, but by difference of Wit; which is not only against
reason; but also against experience. For there are very few so foolish,
that had not rather governe themselves, than be governed by others:
Nor when the wise in their own conceit, contend by force, with them who
distrust their owne wisdome, do they alwaies, or often, or almost at any
time, get the Victory. If Nature therefore have made men equall, that
equalitie is to be acknowledged; or if Nature have made men unequall;
yet because men that think themselves equall, will not enter into
conditions of Peace, but upon Equall termes, such equalitie must be
admitted. And therefore for the ninth Law of Nature, I put this, "That
every man acknowledge other for his Equall by Nature." The breach of
this Precept is Pride.




The Tenth Against Arrogance

On this law, dependeth another, "That at the entrance into conditions of
Peace, no man require to reserve to himselfe any Right, which he is not
content should be reserved to every one of the rest." As it is necessary
for all men that seek peace, to lay down certaine Rights of Nature; that
is to say, not to have libertie to do all they list: so is it necessarie
for mans life, to retaine some; as right to governe their owne bodies;
enjoy aire, water, motion, waies to go from place to place; and all
things else without which a man cannot live, or not live well. If in
this case, at the making of Peace, men require for themselves, that
which they would not have to be granted to others, they do contrary
to the precedent law, that commandeth the acknowledgement of naturall
equalitie, and therefore also against the law of Nature. The observers
of this law, are those we call Modest, and the breakers Arrogant Men.
The Greeks call the violation of this law pleonexia; that is, a desire
of more than their share.




The Eleventh Equity

Also "If a man be trusted to judge between man and man," it is a precept
of the Law of Nature, "that he deale Equally between them." For without
that, the Controversies of men cannot be determined but by Warre.
He therefore that is partiall in judgment, doth what in him lies, to
deterre men from the use of Judges, and Arbitrators; and consequently,
(against the fundamentall Lawe of Nature) is the cause of Warre.

The observance of this law, from the equall distribution to each man, of
that which in reason belongeth to him, is called EQUITY, and (as I have
sayd before) distributive justice: the violation, Acception Of Persons,
Prosopolepsia.




The Twelfth, Equall Use Of Things Common

And from this followeth another law, "That such things as cannot be
divided, be enjoyed in Common, if it can be; and if the quantity of the
thing permit, without Stint; otherwise Proportionably to the number of
them that have Right." For otherwise the distribution is Unequall, and
contrary to Equitie.




The Thirteenth, Of Lot

But some things there be, that can neither be divided, nor enjoyed in
common. Then, The Law of Nature, which prescribeth Equity, requireth,
"That the Entire Right; or else, (making the use alternate,) the First
Possession, be determined by Lot." For equall distribution, is of
the Law of Nature; and other means of equall distribution cannot be
imagined.




The Fourteenth, Of Primogeniture, And First Seising

Of Lots there be two sorts, Arbitrary, and Naturall. Arbitrary, is
that which is agreed on by the Competitors; Naturall, is either
Primogeniture, (which the Greek calls Kleronomia, which signifies, Given
by Lot;) or First Seisure.

And therefore those things which cannot be enjoyed in common, nor
divided, ought to be adjudged to the First Possessor; and is some cases
to the First-Borne, as acquired by Lot.




The Fifteenth, Of Mediators

It is also a Law of Nature, "That all men that mediate Peace, be allowed
safe Conduct." For the Law that commandeth Peace, as the End, commandeth
Intercession, as the Means; and to Intercession the Means is safe
Conduct.




The Sixteenth, Of Submission To Arbitrement

And because, though men be never so willing to observe these Lawes,
there may neverthelesse arise questions concerning a mans action; First,
whether it were done, or not done; Secondly (if done) whether against
the Law, or not against the Law; the former whereof, is called a
question Of Fact; the later a question Of Right; therefore unlesse the
parties to the question, Covenant mutually to stand to the sentence
of another, they are as farre from Peace as ever. This other, to whose
Sentence they submit, is called an ARBITRATOR. And therefore it is of
the Law of Nature, "That they that are at controversie, submit their
Right to the judgement of an Arbitrator."




The Seventeenth, No Man Is His Own Judge

And seeing every man is presumed to do all things in order to his own
benefit, no man is a fit Arbitrator in his own cause: and if he were
never so fit; yet Equity allowing to each party equall benefit, if one
be admitted to be Judge, the other is to be admitted also; & so the
controversie, that is, the cause of War, remains, against the Law of
Nature.




The Eighteenth, No Man To Be Judge, That Has In Him Cause Of Partiality

For the same reason no man in any Cause ought to be received for
Arbitrator, to whom greater profit, or honour, or pleasure apparently
ariseth out of the victory of one party, than of the other: for he hath
taken (though an unavoydable bribe, yet) a bribe; and no man can be
obliged to trust him. And thus also the controversie, and the condition
of War remaineth, contrary to the Law of Nature.




The Nineteenth, Of Witnesse

And in a controversie of Fact, the Judge being to give no more credit
to one, than to the other, (if there be no other Arguments) must give
credit to a third; or to a third and fourth; or more: For else the
question is undecided, and left to force, contrary to the Law of Nature.

These are the Lawes of Nature, dictating Peace, for a means of the
conservation of men in multitudes; and which onely concern the doctrine
of Civill Society. There be other things tending to the destruction of
particular men; as Drunkenness, and all other parts of Intemperance;
which may therefore also be reckoned amongst those things which the Law
of Nature hath forbidden; but are not necessary to be mentioned, nor are
pertinent enough to this place.




A Rule, By Which The Laws Of Nature May Easily Be Examined

And though this may seem too subtile a deduction of the Lawes of Nature,
to be taken notice of by all men; whereof the most part are too busie in
getting food, and the rest too negligent to understand; yet to leave
all men unexcusable, they have been contracted into one easie sum,
intelligible even to the meanest capacity; and that is, "Do not that to
another, which thou wouldest not have done to thy selfe;" which sheweth
him, that he has no more to do in learning the Lawes of Nature, but,
when weighing the actions of other men with his own, they seem too
heavy, to put them into the other part of the ballance, and his own into
their place, that his own passions, and selfe-love, may adde nothing to
the weight; and then there is none of these Lawes of Nature that will
not appear unto him very reasonable.




The Lawes Of Nature Oblige In Conscience Alwayes,

But In Effect Then Onely When There Is Security The Lawes of Nature
oblige In Foro Interno; that is to say, they bind to a desire they
should take place: but In Foro Externo; that is, to the putting them
in act, not alwayes. For he that should be modest, and tractable, and
performe all he promises, in such time, and place, where no man els
should do so, should but make himselfe a prey to others, and procure his
own certain ruine, contrary to the ground of all Lawes of Nature, which
tend to Natures preservation. And again, he that shall observe the same
Lawes towards him, observes them not himselfe, seeketh not Peace, but
War; & consequently the destruction of his Nature by Violence.

And whatsoever Lawes bind In Foro Interno, may be broken, not onely by
a fact contrary to the Law but also by a fact according to it, in case a
man think it contrary. For though his Action in this case, be according
to the Law; which where the Obligation is In Foro Interno, is a breach.




The Laws Of Nature Are Eternal;

The Lawes of Nature are Immutable and Eternall, For Injustice,
Ingratitude, Arrogance, Pride, Iniquity, Acception of persons, and the
rest, can never be made lawfull. For it can never be that Warre shall
preserve life, and Peace destroy it.




And Yet Easie

The same Lawes, because they oblige onely to a desire, and endeavour, I
mean an unfeigned and constant endeavour, are easie to be observed. For
in that they require nothing but endeavour; he that endeavoureth their
performance, fulfilleth them; and he that fulfilleth the Law, is Just.




The Science Of These Lawes, Is The True Morall Philosophy

And the Science of them, is the true and onely Moral Philosophy. For
Morall Philosophy is nothing else but the Science of what is Good, and
Evill, in the conversation, and Society of mankind. Good, and Evill,
are names that signifie our Appetites, and Aversions; which in different
tempers, customes, and doctrines of men, are different: And divers men,
differ not onely in their Judgement, on the senses of what is pleasant,
and unpleasant to the tast, smell, hearing, touch, and sight; but also
of what is conformable, or disagreeable to Reason, in the actions of
common life. Nay, the same man, in divers times, differs from himselfe;
and one time praiseth, that is, calleth Good, what another time
he dispraiseth, and calleth Evil: From whence arise Disputes,
Controversies, and at last War. And therefore so long as man is in the
condition of meer Nature, (which is a condition of War,) as private
Appetite is the measure of Good, and Evill: and consequently all men
agree on this, that Peace is Good, and therefore also the way, or
means of Peace, which (as I have shewed before) are Justice, Gratitude,
Modesty, Equity, Mercy, & the rest of the Laws of Nature, are good; that
is to say, Morall Vertues; and their contrarie Vices, Evill. Now the
science of Vertue and Vice, is Morall Philosophie; and therfore the true
Doctrine of the Lawes of Nature, is the true Morall Philosophie. But the
Writers of Morall Philosophie, though they acknowledge the same Vertues
and Vices; Yet not seeing wherein consisted their Goodnesse; nor that
they come to be praised, as the meanes of peaceable, sociable, and
comfortable living; place them in a mediocrity of passions: as if not
the Cause, but the Degree of daring, made Fortitude; or not the Cause,
but the Quantity of a gift, made Liberality.

These dictates of Reason, men use to call by the name of Lawes; but
improperly: for they are but Conclusions, or Theoremes concerning what
conduceth to the conservation and defence of themselves; whereas Law,
properly is the word of him, that by right hath command over others. But
yet if we consider the same Theoremes, as delivered in the word of
God, that by right commandeth all things; then are they properly called
Lawes.



CHAPTER XVI. OF PERSONS, AUTHORS, AND THINGS PERSONATED



A Person What

A PERSON, is he "whose words or actions are considered, either as his
own, or as representing the words or actions of an other man, or of any
other thing to whom they are attributed, whether Truly or by Fiction."




Person Naturall, And Artificiall

When they are considered as his owne, then is he called a Naturall
Person: And when they are considered as representing the words and
actions of an other, then is he a Feigned or Artificiall person.




The Word Person, Whence

The word Person is latine: instead whereof the Greeks have Prosopon,
which signifies the Face, as Persona in latine signifies the Disguise,
or Outward Appearance of a man, counterfeited on the Stage; and somtimes
more particularly that part of it, which disguiseth the face, as a Mask
or Visard: And from the Stage, hath been translated to any Representer
of speech and action, as well in Tribunalls, as Theaters. So that a
Person, is the same that an Actor is, both on the Stage and in common
Conversation; and to Personate, is to Act, or Represent himselfe, or an
other; and he that acteth another, is said to beare his Person, or
act in his name; (in which sence Cicero useth it where he saies, "Unus
Sustineo Tres Personas; Mei, Adversarii, & Judicis, I beare three
Persons; my own, my Adversaries, and the Judges;") and is called in
diverse occasions, diversly; as a Representer, or Representative, a
Lieutenant, a Vicar, an Attorney, a Deputy, a Procurator, an Actor, and
the like.




Actor, Author; Authority

Of Persons Artificiall, some have their words and actions Owned by
those whom they represent. And then the Person is the Actor; and he that
owneth his words and actions, is the AUTHOR: In which case the
Actor acteth by Authority. For that which in speaking of goods and
possessions, is called an Owner, and in latine Dominus, in Greeke
Kurios; speaking of Actions, is called Author. And as the Right of
possession, is called Dominion; so the Right of doing any Action, is
called AUTHORITY. So that by Authority, is alwayes understood a Right
of doing any act: and Done By Authority, done by Commission, or Licence
from him whose right it is.




Covenants By Authority, Bind The Author

From hence it followeth, that when the Actor maketh a Covenant by
Authority, he bindeth thereby the Author, no lesse than if he had made
it himselfe; and no lesse subjecteth him to all the consequences of the
same. And therfore all that hath been said formerly, (Chap. 14) of the
nature of Covenants between man and man in their naturall capacity,
is true also when they are made by their Actors, Representers, or
Procurators, that have authority from them, so far-forth as is in their
Commission, but no farther.

And therefore he that maketh a Covenant with the Actor, or Representer,
not knowing the Authority he hath, doth it at his own perill. For no man
is obliged by a Covenant, whereof he is not Author; nor consequently by
a Covenant made against, or beside the Authority he gave.




But Not The Actor

When the Actor doth any thing against the Law of Nature by command of
the Author, if he be obliged by former Covenant to obey him, not he, but
the Author breaketh the Law of Nature: for though the Action be against
the Law of Nature; yet it is not his: but contrarily; to refuse to do
it, is against the Law of Nature, that forbiddeth breach of Covenant.




The Authority Is To Be Shewne

And he that maketh a Covenant with the Author, by mediation of the
Actor, not knowing what Authority he hath, but onely takes his word;
in case such Authority be not made manifest unto him upon demand, is
no longer obliged: For the Covenant made with the Author, is not valid,
without his Counter-assurance. But if he that so Covenanteth, knew
before hand he was to expect no other assurance, than the Actors word;
then is the Covenant valid; because the Actor in this case maketh
himselfe the Author. And therefore, as when the Authority is evident,
the Covenant obligeth the Author, not the Actor; so when the Authority
is feigned, it obligeth the Actor onely; there being no Author but
himselfe.




Things Personated, Inanimate

There are few things, that are uncapable of being represented by
Fiction. Inanimate things, as a Church, an Hospital, a Bridge, may
be Personated by a Rector, Master, or Overseer. But things Inanimate,
cannot be Authors, nor therefore give Authority to their Actors: Yet the
Actors may have Authority to procure their maintenance, given them by
those that are Owners, or Governours of those things. And therefore,
such things cannot be Personated, before there be some state of Civill
Government.




Irrational

Likewise Children, Fooles, and Mad-men that have no use of Reason, may
be Personated by Guardians, or Curators; but can be no Authors (during
that time) of any action done by them, longer then (when they shall
recover the use of Reason) they shall judge the same reasonable.
Yet during the Folly, he that hath right of governing them, may give
Authority to the Guardian. But this again has no place but in a State
Civill, because before such estate, there is no Dominion of Persons.




False Gods

An Idol, or meer Figment of the brain, may be Personated; as were the
Gods of the Heathen; which by such Officers as the State appointed, were
Personated, and held Possessions, and other Goods, and Rights, which men
from time to time dedicated, and consecrated unto them. But idols cannot
be Authors: for a Idol is nothing. The Authority proceeded from the
State: and therefore before introduction of Civill Government, the Gods
of the Heathen could not be Personated.




The True God

The true God may be Personated. As he was; first, by Moses; who governed
the Israelites, (that were not his, but Gods people,) not in his own
name, with Hoc Dicit Moses; but in Gods Name, with Hoc Dicit Dominus.
Secondly, by the son of man, his own Son our Blessed Saviour Jesus
Christ, that came to reduce the Jewes, and induce all Nations into the
Kingdome of his Father; not as of himselfe, but as sent from his Father.
And thirdly, by the Holy Ghost, or Comforter, speaking, and working
in the Apostles: which Holy Ghost, was a Comforter that came not of
himselfe; but was sent, and proceeded from them both.




A Multitude Of Men, How One Person

A Multitude of men, are made One Person, when they are by one man, or
one Person, Represented; so that it be done with the consent of
every one of that Multitude in particular. For it is the Unity of the
Representer, not the Unity of the Represented, that maketh the Person
One. And it is the Representer that beareth the Person, and but one
Person: And Unity, cannot otherwise be understood in Multitude.




Every One Is Author

And because the Multitude naturally is not One, but Many; they cannot
be understood for one; but many Authors, of every thing their
Representative faith, or doth in their name; Every man giving their
common Representer, Authority from himselfe in particular; and owning
all the actions the Representer doth, in case they give him Authority
without stint: Otherwise, when they limit him in what, and how farre
he shall represent them, none of them owneth more, than they gave him
commission to Act.




An Actor May Be Many Men Made One By Plurality Of Voyces

And if the Representative consist of many men, the voyce of the greater
number, must be considered as the voyce of them all. For if the lesser
number pronounce (for example) in the Affirmative, and the greater in
the Negative, there will be Negatives more than enough to destroy
the Affirmatives; and thereby the excesse of Negatives, standing
uncontradicted, are the onely voyce the Representative hath.




Representatives, When The Number Is Even, Unprofitable

And a Representative of even number, especially when the number is
not great, whereby the contradictory voyces are oftentimes equall, is
therefore oftentimes mute, and uncapable of Action. Yet in some cases
contradictory voyces equall in number, may determine a question; as in
condemning, or absolving, equality of votes, even in that they condemne
not, do absolve; but not on the contrary condemne, in that they absolve
not. For when a Cause is heard; not to condemne, is to absolve; but on
the contrary, to say that not absolving, is condemning, is not true. The
like it is in a deliberation of executing presently, or deferring
till another time; For when the voyces are equall, the not decreeing
Execution, is a decree of Dilation.




Negative Voyce

Or if the number be odde, as three, or more, (men, or assemblies;)
whereof every one has by a Negative Voice, authority to take away the
effect of all the Affirmative Voices of the rest, This number is no
Representative; because by the diversity of Opinions, and Interests of
men, it becomes oftentimes, and in cases of the greatest consequence, a
mute Person, and unapt, as for may things else, so for the government of
a Multitude, especially in time of Warre.

Of Authors there be two sorts. The first simply so called; which I have
before defined to be him, that owneth the Action of another simply.
The second is he, that owneth an Action, or Covenant of another
conditionally; that is to say, he undertaketh to do it, if the
other doth it not, at, or before a certain time. And these Authors
conditionall, are generally called SURETYES, in Latine Fidejussores, and
Sponsores; and particularly for Debt, Praedes; and for Appearance before
a Judge, or Magistrate, Vades.





PART II.
OF COMMON-WEALTH




CHAPTER XVII. OF THE CAUSES, GENERATION, AND DEFINITION OF A
COMMON-WEALTH




The End Of Common-wealth, Particular Security

The finall Cause, End, or Designe of men, (who naturally love Liberty,
and Dominion over others,) in the introduction of that restraint upon
themselves, (in which wee see them live in Common-wealths,) is the
foresight of their own preservation, and of a more contented life
thereby; that is to say, of getting themselves out from that miserable
condition of Warre, which is necessarily consequent (as hath been shewn)
to the naturall Passions of men, when there is no visible Power to keep
them in awe, and tye them by feare of punishment to the performance of
their Covenants, and observation of these Lawes of Nature set down in
the fourteenth and fifteenth Chapters.




Which Is Not To Be Had From The Law Of Nature:

For the Lawes of Nature (as Justice, Equity, Modesty, Mercy, and (in
summe) Doing To Others, As Wee Would Be Done To,) if themselves, without
the terrour of some Power, to cause them to be observed, are contrary to
our naturall Passions, that carry us to Partiality, Pride, Revenge, and
the like. And Covenants, without the Sword, are but Words, and of no
strength to secure a man at all. Therefore notwithstanding the Lawes of
Nature, (which every one hath then kept, when he has the will to keep
them, when he can do it safely,) if there be no Power erected, or not
great enough for our security; every man will and may lawfully rely on
his own strength and art, for caution against all other men. And in all
places, where men have lived by small Families, to robbe and spoyle one
another, has been a Trade, and so farre from being reputed against the
Law of Nature, that the greater spoyles they gained, the greater was
their honour; and men observed no other Lawes therein, but the Lawes of
Honour; that is, to abstain from cruelty, leaving to men their lives,
and instruments of husbandry. And as small Familyes did then; so now
do Cities and Kingdomes which are but greater Families (for their own
security) enlarge their Dominions, upon all pretences of danger, and
fear of Invasion, or assistance that may be given to Invaders, endeavour
as much as they can, to subdue, or weaken their neighbours, by open
force, and secret arts, for want of other Caution, justly; and are
remembred for it in after ages with honour.




Nor From The Conjunction Of A Few Men Or Familyes

Nor is it the joyning together of a small number of men, that gives them
this security; because in small numbers, small additions on the one side
or the other, make the advantage of strength so great, as is sufficient
to carry the Victory; and therefore gives encouragement to an Invasion.
The Multitude sufficient to confide in for our Security, is not
determined by any certain number, but by comparison with the Enemy we
feare; and is then sufficient, when the odds of the Enemy is not of so
visible and conspicuous moment, to determine the event of warre, as to
move him to attempt.




Nor From A Great Multitude, Unlesse Directed By One Judgement

And be there never so great a Multitude; yet if their actions be
directed according to their particular judgements, and particular
appetites, they can expect thereby no defence, nor protection, neither
against a Common enemy, nor against the injuries of one another. For
being distracted in opinions concerning the best use and application
of their strength, they do not help, but hinder one another; and reduce
their strength by mutuall opposition to nothing: whereby they are
easily, not onely subdued by a very few that agree together; but also
when there is no common enemy, they make warre upon each other, for
their particular interests. For if we could suppose a great Multitude of
men to consent in the observation of Justice, and other Lawes of Nature,
without a common Power to keep them all in awe; we might as well suppose
all Man-kind to do the same; and then there neither would be nor need to
be any Civill Government, or Common-wealth at all; because there would
be Peace without subjection.




And That Continually

Nor is it enough for the security, which men desire should last all
the time of their life, that they be governed, and directed by one
judgement, for a limited time; as in one Battell, or one Warre. For
though they obtain a Victory by their unanimous endeavour against a
forraign enemy; yet afterwards, when either they have no common enemy,
or he that by one part is held for an enemy, is by another part held for
a friend, they must needs by the difference of their interests dissolve,
and fall again into a Warre amongst themselves.




Why Certain Creatures Without Reason, Or Speech,




Do Neverthelesse Live In Society, Without Any Coercive Power

It is true, that certain living creatures, as Bees, and Ants, live
sociably one with another, (which are therefore by Aristotle numbred
amongst Politicall creatures;) and yet have no other direction, than
their particular judgements and appetites; nor speech, whereby one of
them can signifie to another, what he thinks expedient for the common
benefit: and therefore some man may perhaps desire to know, why Man-kind
cannot do the same. To which I answer,

First, that men are continually in competition for Honour and Dignity,
which these creatures are not; and consequently amongst men there
ariseth on that ground, Envy and Hatred, and finally Warre; but amongst
these not so.

Secondly, that amongst these creatures, the Common good differeth not
from the Private; and being by nature enclined to their private, they
procure thereby the common benefit. But man, whose Joy consisteth
in comparing himselfe with other men, can relish nothing but what is
eminent.

Thirdly, that these creatures, having not (as man) the use of reason,
do not see, nor think they see any fault, in the administration of their
common businesse: whereas amongst men, there are very many, that thinke
themselves wiser, and abler to govern the Publique, better than the
rest; and these strive to reforme and innovate, one this way, another
that way; and thereby bring it into Distraction and Civill warre.

Fourthly, that these creatures, though they have some use of voice, in
making knowne to one another their desires, and other affections; yet
they want that art of words, by which some men can represent to others,
that which is Good, in the likenesse of Evill; and Evill, in the
likenesse of Good; and augment, or diminish the apparent greatnesse of
Good and Evill; discontenting men, and troubling their Peace at their
pleasure.

Fiftly, irrationall creatures cannot distinguish betweene Injury, and
Dammage; and therefore as long as they be at ease, they are not offended
with their fellowes: whereas Man is then most troublesome, when he is
most at ease: for then it is that he loves to shew his Wisdome, and
controule the Actions of them that governe the Common-wealth.

Lastly, the agreement of these creatures is Naturall; that of men, is
by Covenant only, which is Artificiall: and therefore it is no wonder
if there be somewhat else required (besides Covenant) to make their
Agreement constant and lasting; which is a Common Power, to keep them in
awe, and to direct their actions to the Common Benefit.




The Generation Of A Common-wealth

The only way to erect such a Common Power, as may be able to defend them
from the invasion of Forraigners, and the injuries of one another, and
thereby to secure them in such sort, as that by their owne industrie,
and by the fruites of the Earth, they may nourish themselves and live
contentedly; is, to conferre all their power and strength upon one
Man, or upon one Assembly of men, that may reduce all their Wills,
by plurality of voices, unto one Will: which is as much as to say, to
appoint one man, or Assembly of men, to beare their Person; and every
one to owne, and acknowledge himselfe to be Author of whatsoever he
that so beareth their Person, shall Act, or cause to be Acted, in those
things which concerne the Common Peace and Safetie; and therein to
submit their Wills, every one to his Will, and their Judgements, to his
Judgment. This is more than Consent, or Concord; it is a reall Unitie of
them all, in one and the same Person, made by Covenant of every man with
every man, in such manner, as if every man should say to every man, "I
Authorise and give up my Right of Governing my selfe, to this Man, or to
this Assembly of men, on this condition, that thou give up thy Right
to him, and Authorise all his Actions in like manner." This done, the
Multitude so united in one Person, is called a COMMON-WEALTH, in latine
CIVITAS. This is the Generation of that great LEVIATHAN, or rather (to
speake more reverently) of that Mortall God, to which wee owe under the
Immortall God, our peace and defence. For by this Authoritie, given him
by every particular man in the Common-Wealth, he hath the use of so
much Power and Strength conferred on him, that by terror thereof, he is
inabled to forme the wills of them all, to Peace at home, and mutuall
ayd against their enemies abroad.




The Definition Of A Common-wealth

And in him consisteth the Essence of the Common-wealth; which (to
define it,) is "One Person, of whose Acts a great Multitude, by mutuall
Covenants one with another, have made themselves every one the Author,
to the end he may use the strength and means of them all, as he shall
think expedient, for their Peace and Common Defence."




Soveraigne, And Subject, What

And he that carryeth this Person, as called SOVERAIGNE, and said to have
Soveraigne Power; and every one besides, his SUBJECT.

The attaining to this Soveraigne Power, is by two wayes. One, by
Naturall force; as when a man maketh his children, to submit themselves,
and their children to his government, as being able to destroy them if
they refuse, or by Warre subdueth his enemies to his will, giving them
their lives on that condition. The other, is when men agree amongst
themselves, to submit to some Man, or Assembly of men, voluntarily, on
confidence to be protected by him against all others. This later, may be
called a Politicall Common-wealth, or Common-wealth by Institution; and
the former, a Common-wealth by Acquisition. And first, I shall speak of
a Common-wealth by Institution.



CHAPTER XVIII. OF THE RIGHTS OF SOVERAIGNES BY INSTITUTION




The Act Of Instituting A Common-wealth, What

A Common-wealth is said to be Instituted, when a Multitude of men do
Agree, and Covenant, Every One With Every One, that to whatsoever Man,
or Assembly Of Men, shall be given by the major part, the Right
to Present the Person of them all, (that is to say, to be their
Representative;) every one, as well he that Voted For It, as he that
Voted Against It, shall Authorise all the Actions and Judgements, of
that Man, or Assembly of men, in the same manner, as if they were his
own, to the end, to live peaceably amongst themselves, and be protected
against other men.




The Consequences To Such Institution, Are




1. The Subjects Cannot Change The Forme Of Government




From this Institution of a Common-wealth are derived all the Rights, and
Facultyes of him, or them, on whom the Soveraigne Power is conferred by
the consent of the People assembled.

First, because they Covenant, it is to be understood, they are not
obliged by former Covenant to any thing repugnant hereunto. And
Consequently they that have already Instituted a Common-wealth, being
thereby bound by Covenant, to own the Actions, and Judgements of one,
cannot lawfully make a new Covenant, amongst themselves, to be obedient
to any other, in any thing whatsoever, without his permission. And
therefore, they that are subjects to a Monarch, cannot without his leave
cast off Monarchy, and return to the confusion of a disunited Multitude;
nor transferre their Person from him that beareth it, to another Man,
or other Assembly of men: for they are bound, every man to every man,
to Own, and be reputed Author of all, that he that already is their
Soveraigne, shall do, and judge fit to be done: so that any one man
dissenting, all the rest should break their Covenant made to that man,
which is injustice: and they have also every man given the Soveraignty
to him that beareth their Person; and therefore if they depose him,
they take from him that which is his own, and so again it is injustice.
Besides, if he that attempteth to depose his Soveraign, be killed, or
punished by him for such attempt, he is author of his own punishment,
as being by the Institution, Author of all his Soveraign shall do: And
because it is injustice for a man to do any thing, for which he may be
punished by his own authority, he is also upon that title, unjust.
And whereas some men have pretended for their disobedience to their
Soveraign, a new Covenant, made, not with men, but with God; this also
is unjust: for there is no Covenant with God, but by mediation of some
body that representeth Gods Person; which none doth but Gods Lieutenant,
who hath the Soveraignty under God. But this pretence of Covenant with
God, is so evident a lye, even in the pretenders own consciences, that
it is not onely an act of an unjust, but also of a vile, and unmanly
disposition.




2. Soveraigne Power Cannot Be Forfeited

Secondly, Because the Right of bearing the Person of them all, is given
to him they make Soveraigne, by Covenant onely of one to another, and
not of him to any of them; there can happen no breach of Covenant on the
part of the Soveraigne; and consequently none of his Subjects, by any
pretence of forfeiture, can be freed from his Subjection. That he which
is made Soveraigne maketh no Covenant with his Subjects beforehand, is
manifest; because either he must make it with the whole multitude, as
one party to the Covenant; or he must make a severall Covenant with
every man. With the whole, as one party, it is impossible; because as
yet they are not one Person: and if he make so many severall Covenants
as there be men, those Covenants after he hath the Soveraignty are voyd,
because what act soever can be pretended by any one of them for breach
thereof, is the act both of himselfe, and of all the rest, because done
in the Person, and by the Right of every one of them in particular.
Besides, if any one, or more of them, pretend a breach of the Covenant
made by the Soveraigne at his Institution; and others, or one other of
his Subjects, or himselfe alone, pretend there was no such breach,
there is in this case, no Judge to decide the controversie: it returns
therefore to the Sword again; and every man recovereth the right of
Protecting himselfe by his own strength, contrary to the designe they
had in the Institution. It is therefore in vain to grant Soveraignty by
way of precedent Covenant. The opinion that any Monarch receiveth his
Power by Covenant, that is to say on Condition, proceedeth from want
of understanding this easie truth, that Covenants being but words, and
breath, have no force to oblige, contain, constrain, or protect any man,
but what it has from the publique Sword; that is, from the untyed hands
of that Man, or Assembly of men that hath the Soveraignty, and whose
actions are avouched by them all, and performed by the strength of them
all, in him united. But when an Assembly of men is made Soveraigne; then
no man imagineth any such Covenant to have past in the Institution; for
no man is so dull as to say, for example, the People of Rome, made
a Covenant with the Romans, to hold the Soveraignty on such or such
conditions; which not performed, the Romans might lawfully depose the
Roman People. That men see not the reason to be alike in a Monarchy, and
in a Popular Government, proceedeth from the ambition of some, that
are kinder to the government of an Assembly, whereof they may hope to
participate, than of Monarchy, which they despair to enjoy.




3. No Man Can Without Injustice Protest Against The Institution Of The
Soveraigne Declared By The Major Part.

Thirdly, because the major part hath by consenting voices declared a
Soveraigne; he that dissented must now consent with the rest; that is,
be contented to avow all the actions he shall do, or else justly be
destroyed by the rest. For if he voluntarily entered into the
Congregation of them that were assembled, he sufficiently declared
thereby his will (and therefore tacitely covenanted) to stand to what
the major part should ordayne: and therefore if he refuse to stand
thereto, or make Protestation against any of their Decrees, he does
contrary to his Covenant, and therfore unjustly. And whether he be of
the Congregation, or not; and whether his consent be asked, or not, he
must either submit to their decrees, or be left in the condition of
warre he was in before; wherein he might without injustice be destroyed
by any man whatsoever.




4. The Soveraigns Actions Cannot Be Justly Accused By The Subject

Fourthly, because every Subject is by this Institution Author of all the
Actions, and Judgements of the Soveraigne Instituted; it followes, that
whatsoever he doth, it can be no injury to any of his Subjects; nor
ought he to be by any of them accused of Injustice. For he that doth any
thing by authority from another, doth therein no injury to him by whose
authority he acteth: But by this Institution of a Common-wealth, every
particular man is Author of all the Soveraigne doth; and consequently
he that complaineth of injury from his Soveraigne, complaineth of that
whereof he himselfe is Author; and therefore ought not to accuse any man
but himselfe; no nor himselfe of injury; because to do injury to ones
selfe, is impossible. It is true that they that have Soveraigne
power, may commit Iniquity; but not Injustice, or Injury in the proper
signification.




5. What Soever The Soveraigne Doth, Is Unpunishable By The Subject

Fiftly, and consequently to that which was sayd last, no man that hath
Soveraigne power can justly be put to death, or otherwise in any manner
by his Subjects punished. For seeing every Subject is author of the
actions of his Soveraigne; he punisheth another, for the actions
committed by himselfe.




6. The Soveraigne Is Judge Of What Is Necessary For The Peace And
Defence Of His Subjects

And because the End of this Institution, is the Peace and Defence of
them all; and whosoever has right to the End, has right to the Means;
it belongeth of Right, to whatsoever Man, or Assembly that hath the
Soveraignty, to be Judge both of the meanes of Peace and Defence;
and also of the hindrances, and disturbances of the same; and to do
whatsoever he shall think necessary to be done, both beforehand, for the
preserving of Peace and Security, by prevention of discord at home and
Hostility from abroad; and, when Peace and Security are lost, for the
recovery of the same. And therefore,




And Judge Of What Doctrines Are Fit To Be Taught Them

Sixtly, it is annexed to the Soveraignty, to be Judge of what Opinions
and Doctrines are averse, and what conducing to Peace; and consequently,
on what occasions, how farre, and what, men are to be trusted withall,
in speaking to Multitudes of people; and who shall examine the Doctrines
of all bookes before they be published. For the Actions of men proceed
from their Opinions; and in the wel governing of Opinions, consisteth
the well governing of mens Actions, in order to their Peace, and
Concord. And though in matter of Doctrine, nothing ought to be regarded
but the Truth; yet this is not repugnant to regulating of the same by
Peace. For Doctrine Repugnant to Peace, can no more be True, than Peace
and Concord can be against the Law of Nature. It is true, that in
a Common-wealth, where by the negligence, or unskilfullnesse of
Governours, and Teachers, false Doctrines are by time generally
received; the contrary Truths may be generally offensive; Yet the most
sudden, and rough busling in of a new Truth, that can be, does never
breake the Peace, but onely somtimes awake the Warre. For those men that
are so remissely governed, that they dare take up Armes, to defend, or
introduce an Opinion, are still in Warre; and their condition not Peace,
but only a Cessation of Armes for feare of one another; and they live
as it were, in the procincts of battaile continually. It belongeth
therefore to him that hath the Soveraign Power, to be Judge, or
constitute all Judges of Opinions and Doctrines, as a thing necessary to
Peace, thereby to prevent Discord and Civill Warre.




7. The Right of making Rules, whereby the Subject may every man know
what is so his owne, as no other Subject can without injustice take it
from him

Seventhly, is annexed to the Soveraigntie, the whole power of
prescribing the Rules, whereby every man may know, what Goods he may
enjoy and what Actions he may doe, without being molested by any of
his fellow Subjects: And this is it men Call Propriety. For before
constitution of Soveraign Power (as hath already been shewn) all men had
right to all things; which necessarily causeth Warre: and therefore this
Proprietie, being necessary to Peace, and depending on Soveraign Power,
is the Act of the Power, in order to the publique peace. These Rules of
Propriety (or Meum and Tuum) and of Good, Evill, Lawfull and Unlawfull
in the actions of subjects, are the Civill Lawes, that is to say, the
lawes of each Commonwealth in particular; though the name of Civill Law
be now restrained to the antient Civill Lawes of the City of Rome; which
being the head of a great part of the World, her Lawes at that time were
in these parts the Civill Law.




8. To Him Also Belongeth The Right Of All Judicature And Decision Of
Controversies:

Eightly, is annexed to the Soveraigntie, the Right of Judicature; that
is to say, of hearing and deciding all Controversies, which may arise
concerning Law, either Civill, or naturall, or concerning Fact. For
without the decision of Controversies, there is no protection of one
Subject, against the injuries of another; the Lawes concerning Meum and
Tuum are in vaine; and to every man remaineth, from the naturall and
necessary appetite of his own conservation, the right of protecting
himselfe by his private strength, which is the condition of Warre; and
contrary to the end for which every Common-wealth is instituted.




9. And Of Making War, And Peace, As He Shall Think Best:

Ninthly, is annexed to the Soveraignty, the Right of making Warre, and
Peace with other Nations, and Common-wealths; that is to say, of
Judging when it is for the publique good, and how great forces are to
be assembled, armed, and payd for that end; and to levy mony upon the
Subjects, to defray the expenses thereof. For the Power by which the
people are to be defended, consisteth in their Armies; and the strength
of an Army, in the union of their strength under one Command; which
Command the Soveraign Instituted, therefore hath; because the command
of the Militia, without other Institution, maketh him that hath it
Soveraign. And therefore whosoever is made Generall of an Army, he that
hath the Soveraign Power is alwayes Generallissimo.




10. And Of Choosing All Counsellours, And Ministers, Both Of Peace, And
Warre:

Tenthly, is annexed to the Soveraignty, the choosing of all
Councellours, Ministers, Magistrates, and Officers, both in peace, and
War. For seeing the Soveraign is charged with the End, which is the
common Peace and Defence; he is understood to have Power to use such
Means, as he shall think most fit for his discharge.




11. And Of Rewarding, And Punishing, And That (Where No
Former Law hath Determined The Measure Of It) Arbitrary:

Eleventhly, to the Soveraign is committed the Power of Rewarding
with riches, or honour; and of Punishing with corporall, or pecuniary
punishment, or with ignominy every Subject according to the Lawe he hath
formerly made; or if there be no Law made, according as he shall judge
most to conduce to the encouraging of men to serve the Common-wealth, or
deterring of them from doing dis-service to the same.




12. And Of Honour And Order

Lastly, considering what values men are naturally apt to set upon
themselves; what respect they look for from others; and how little they
value other men; from whence continually arise amongst them, Emulation,
Quarrells, Factions, and at last Warre, to the destroying of one
another, and diminution of their strength against a Common Enemy; It
is necessary that there be Lawes of Honour, and a publique rate of the
worth of such men as have deserved, or are able to deserve well of the
Common-wealth; and that there be force in the hands of some or other, to
put those Lawes in execution. But it hath already been shown, that not
onely the whole Militia, or forces of the Common-wealth; but also the
Judicature of all Controversies, is annexed to the Soveraignty. To the
Soveraign therefore it belongeth also to give titles of Honour; and to
appoint what Order of place, and dignity, each man shall hold; and what
signes of respect, in publique or private meetings, they shall give to
one another.




These Rights Are Indivisible

These are the Rights, which make the Essence of Soveraignty; and which
are the markes, whereby a man may discern in what Man, or Assembly
of men, the Soveraign Power is placed, and resideth. For these are
incommunicable, and inseparable. The Power to coyn Mony; to dispose of
the estate and persons of Infant heires; to have praeemption in
Markets; and all other Statute Praerogatives, may be transferred by the
Soveraign; and yet the Power to protect his Subject be retained. But if
he transferre the Militia, he retains the Judicature in vain, for want
of execution of the Lawes; Or if he grant away the Power of raising
Mony; the Militia is in vain: or if he give away the government of
doctrines, men will be frighted into rebellion with the feare of
Spirits. And so if we consider any one of the said Rights, we shall
presently see, that the holding of all the rest, will produce no
effect, in the conservation of Peace and Justice, the end for which all
Common-wealths are Instituted. And this division is it, whereof it is
said, "A kingdome divided in it selfe cannot stand:" For unlesse this
division precede, division into opposite Armies can never happen. If
there had not first been an opinion received of the greatest part of
England, that these Powers were divided between the King, and the Lords,
and the House of Commons, the people had never been divided, and
fallen into this Civill Warre; first between those that disagreed
in Politiques; and after between the Dissenters about the liberty of
Religion; which have so instructed men in this point of Soveraign Right,
that there be few now (in England,) that do not see, that these Rights
are inseparable, and will be so generally acknowledged, at the next
return of Peace; and so continue, till their miseries are forgotten; and
no longer, except the vulgar be better taught than they have hetherto
been.




And Can By No Grant Passe Away Without Direct Renouncing Of The
Soveraign Power

And because they are essentiall and inseparable Rights, it follows
necessarily, that in whatsoever, words any of them seem to be granted
away, yet if the Soveraign Power it selfe be not in direct termes
renounced, and the name of Soveraign no more given by the Grantees to
him that Grants them, the Grant is voyd: for when he has granted all he
can, if we grant back the Soveraignty, all is restored, as inseparably
annexed thereunto.




The Power And Honour Of Subjects Vanisheth In The Presence Of The Power
Soveraign

This great Authority being indivisible, and inseparably annexed to the
Soveraignty, there is little ground for the opinion of them, that say of
Soveraign Kings, though they be Singulis Majores, of greater Power than
every one of their Subjects, yet they be Universis Minores, of lesse
power than them all together. For if by All Together, they mean not
the collective body as one person, then All Together, and Every One,
signifie the same; and the speech is absurd. But if by All Together,
they understand them as one Person (which person the Soveraign bears,)
then the power of all together, is the same with the Soveraigns power;
and so again the speech is absurd; which absurdity they see well enough,
when the Soveraignty is in an Assembly of the people; but in a Monarch
they see it not; and yet the power of Soveraignty is the same in
whomsoever it be placed.

And as the Power, so also the Honour of the Soveraign, ought to be
greater, than that of any, or all the Subjects. For in the Soveraignty
is the fountain of Honour. The dignities of Lord, Earle, Duke, and
Prince are his Creatures. As in the presence of the Master, the Servants
are equall, and without any honour at all; So are the Subjects, in the
presence of the Soveraign. And though they shine some more, some lesse,
when they are out of his sight; yet in his presence, they shine no more
than the Starres in presence of the Sun.




Soveraigne Power Not Hurtfull As The Want Of It, And The Hurt Proceeds
For The Greatest Part From Not Submitting Readily, To A Lesse

But a man may here object, that the Condition of Subjects is very
miserable; as being obnoxious to the lusts, and other irregular passions
of him, or them that have so unlimited a Power in their hands. And
commonly they that live under a Monarch, think it the fault of Monarchy;
and they that live under the government of Democracy, or other
Soveraign Assembly, attribute all the inconvenience to that forme of
Common-wealth; whereas the Power in all formes, if they be perfect
enough to protect them, is the same; not considering that the estate
of Man can never be without some incommodity or other; and that the
greatest, that in any forme of Government can possibly happen to the
people in generall, is scarce sensible, in respect of the miseries, and
horrible calamities, that accompany a Civill Warre; or that dissolute
condition of masterlesse men, without subjection to Lawes, and a
coercive Power to tye their hands from rapine, and revenge: nor
considering that the greatest pressure of Soveraign Governours,
proceedeth not from any delight, or profit they can expect in the
dammage, or weakening of their subjects, in whose vigor, consisteth
their own selves, that unwillingly contributing to their own defence,
make it necessary for their Governours to draw from them what they can
in time of Peace, that they may have means on any emergent occasion, or
sudden need, to resist, or take advantage on their Enemies. For all men
are by nature provided of notable multiplying glasses, (that is their
Passions and Self-love,) through which, every little payment appeareth a
great grievance; but are destitute of those prospective glasses, (namely
Morall and Civill Science,) to see a farre off the miseries that hang
over them, and cannot without such payments be avoyded.




CHAPTER XIX. OF THE SEVERALL KINDS OF COMMON-WEALTH BY INSTITUTION,
AND OF SUCCESSION TO THE SOVERAIGNE POWER




The Different Formes Of Common-wealths But Three

The difference of Common-wealths, consisteth in the difference of the
Soveraign, or the Person representative of all and every one of the
Multitude. And because the Soveraignty is either in one Man, or in an
Assembly of more than one; and into that Assembly either Every man hath
right to enter, or not every one, but Certain men distinguished from the
rest; it is manifest, there can be but Three kinds of Common-wealth. For
the Representative must needs be One man, or More: and if more, then it
is the Assembly of All, or but of a Part. When the Representative is One
man, then is the Common-wealth a MONARCHY: when an Assembly of All that
will come together, then it is a DEMOCRACY, or Popular Common-wealth:
when an Assembly of a Part onely, then it is called an ARISTOCRACY.
Other kind of Common-wealth there can be none: for either One, or
More, or All must have the Soveraign Power (which I have shewn to be
indivisible) entire.




Tyranny And Oligarchy, But Different Names Of Monarchy, And Aristocracy

There be other names of Government, in the Histories, and books of
Policy; as Tyranny, and Oligarchy: But they are not the names of other
Formes of Government, but of the same Formes misliked. For they that
are discontented under Monarchy, call it Tyranny; and they that are
displeased with Aristocracy, called it Oligarchy: so also, they which
find themselves grieved under a Democracy, call it Anarchy, (which
signifies want of Government;) and yet I think no man believes, that
want of Government, is any new kind of Government: nor by the same
reason ought they to believe, that the Government is of one kind, when
they like it, and another, when they mislike it, or are oppressed by the
Governours.




Subordinate Representatives Dangerous

It is manifest, that men who are in absolute liberty, may, if they
please, give Authority to One Man, to represent them every one; as
well as give such Authority to any Assembly of men whatsoever; and
consequently may subject themselves, if they think good, to a Monarch,
as absolutely, as to any other Representative. Therefore, where there is
already erected a Soveraign Power, there can be no other Representative
of the same people, but onely to certain particular ends, by the
Soveraign limited. For that were to erect two Soveraigns; and every
man to have his person represented by two Actors, that by opposing one
another, must needs divide that Power, which (if men will live in Peace)
is indivisible, and thereby reduce the Multitude into the condition of
Warre, contrary to the end for which all Soveraignty is instituted. And
therefore as it is absurd, to think that a Soveraign Assembly, inviting
the People of their Dominion, to send up their Deputies, with power
to make known their Advise, or Desires, should therefore hold such
Deputies, rather than themselves, for the absolute Representative of
the people: so it is absurd also, to think the same in a Monarchy. And
I know not how this so manifest a truth, should of late be so little
observed; that in a Monarchy, he that had the Soveraignty from a descent
of 600 years, was alone called Soveraign, had the title of Majesty from
every one of his Subjects, and was unquestionably taken by them
for their King; was notwithstanding never considered as their
Representative; that name without contradiction passing for the title
of those men, which at his command were sent up by the people to carry
their Petitions, and give him (if he permitted it) their advise. Which
may serve as an admonition, for those that are the true, and absolute
Representative of a People, to instruct men in the nature of that
Office, and to take heed how they admit of any other generall
Representation upon any occasion whatsoever, if they mean to discharge
the truth committed to them.




Comparison Of Monarchy, With Soveraign Assemblyes

The difference between these three kindes of Common-wealth, consisteth
not in the difference of Power; but in the difference of Convenience, or
Aptitude to produce the Peace, and Security of the people; for which end
they were instituted. And to compare Monarchy with the other two, we may
observe; First, that whosoever beareth the Person of the people, or
is one of that Assembly that bears it, beareth also his own naturall
Person. And though he be carefull in his politique Person to procure
the common interest; yet he is more, or no lesse carefull to procure the
private good of himselfe, his family, kindred and friends; and for the
most part, if the publique interest chance to crosse the private, he
preferrs the private: for the Passions of men, are commonly more potent
than their Reason. From whence it follows, that where the publique and
private interest are most closely united, there is the publique most
advanced. Now in Monarchy, the private interest is the same with the
publique. The riches, power, and honour of a Monarch arise onely from
the riches, strength and reputation of his Subjects. For no King can
be rich, nor glorious, nor secure; whose Subjects are either poore, or
contemptible, or too weak through want, or dissention, to maintain a
war against their enemies: Whereas in a Democracy, or Aristocracy, the
publique prosperity conferres not so much to the private fortune of one
that is corrupt, or ambitious, as doth many times a perfidious advice, a
treacherous action, or a Civill warre.

Secondly, that a Monarch receiveth counsell of whom, when, and where he
pleaseth; and consequently may heare the opinion of men versed in the
matter about which he deliberates, of what rank or quality soever, and
as long before the time of action, and with as much secrecy, as he will.
But when a Soveraigne Assembly has need of Counsell, none are admitted
but such as have a Right thereto from the beginning; which for the
most part are of those who have beene versed more in the acquisition
of Wealth than of Knowledge; and are to give their advice in long
discourses, which may, and do commonly excite men to action, but
not governe them in it. For the Understanding is by the flame of the
Passions, never enlightned, but dazled: Nor is there any place, or time,
wherein an Assemblie can receive Counsell with secrecie, because of
their owne Multitude.

Thirdly, that the Resolutions of a Monarch, are subject to no other
Inconstancy, than that of Humane Nature; but in Assemblies, besides that
of Nature, there ariseth an Inconstancy from the Number. For the absence
of a few, that would have the Resolution once taken, continue firme,
(which may happen by security, negligence, or private impediments,) or
the diligent appearance of a few of the contrary opinion, undoes to day,
all that was concluded yesterday.

Fourthly, that a Monarch cannot disagree with himselfe, out of envy, or
interest; but an Assembly may; and that to such a height, as may produce
a Civill Warre.

Fifthly, that in Monarchy there is this inconvenience; that any Subject,
by the power of one man, for the enriching of a favourite or flatterer,
may be deprived of all he possesseth; which I confesse is a great and
inevitable inconvenience. But the same may as well happen, where the
Soveraigne Power is in an Assembly: for their power is the same; and
they are as subject to evill Counsell, and to be seduced by Orators, as
a Monarch by Flatterers; and becoming one an others Flatterers, serve
one anothers Covetousnesse and Ambition by turnes. And whereas the
Favorites of an Assembly, are many; and the Kindred much more numerous,
than of any Monarch. Besides, there is no Favourite of a Monarch, which
cannot as well succour his friends, as hurt his enemies: But Orators,
that is to say, Favourites of Soveraigne Assemblies, though they have
great power to hurt, have little to save. For to accuse, requires lesse
Eloquence (such is mans Nature) than to excuse; and condemnation, than
absolution more resembles Justice.

Sixtly, that it is an inconvenience in Monarchie, that the Soveraigntie
may descend upon an Infant, or one that cannot discerne between Good and
Evill: and consisteth in this, that the use of his Power, must be in the
hand of another Man, or of some Assembly of men, which are to governe by
his right, and in his name; as Curators, and Protectors of his Person,
and Authority. But to say there is inconvenience, in putting the use of
the Soveraign Power, into the hand of a Man, or an Assembly of men; is
to say that all Government is more Inconvenient, than Confusion, and
Civill Warre. And therefore all the danger that can be pretended, must
arise from the Contention of those, that for an office of so great
honour, and profit, may become Competitors. To make it appear, that
this inconvenience, proceedeth not from that forme of Government we call
Monarchy, we are to consider, that the precedent Monarch, hath appointed
who shall have the Tuition of his Infant Successor, either expressely
by Testament, or tacitly, by not controlling the Custome in that
case received: And then such inconvenience (if it happen) is to be
attributed, not to the Monarchy, but to the Ambition, and Injustice of
the Subjects; which in all kinds of Government, where the people are
not well instructed in their Duty, and the Rights of Soveraignty, is
the same. Or else the precedent Monarch, hath not at all taken order for
such Tuition; And then the Law of Nature hath provided this sufficient
rule, That the Tuition shall be in him, that hath by Nature most
interest in the preservation of the Authority of the Infant, and to whom
least benefit can accrue by his death, or diminution. For seeing every
man by nature seeketh his own benefit, and promotion; to put an Infant
into the power of those, that can promote themselves by his destruction,
or dammage, is not Tuition, but Trechery. So that sufficient provision
being taken, against all just quarrell, about the Government under a
Child, if any contention arise to the disturbance of the publique Peace,
it is not to be attributed to the forme of Monarchy, but to the ambition
of Subjects, and ignorance of their Duty. On the other side, there is
no great Common-wealth, the Soveraignty whereof is in a great Assembly,
which is not, as to consultations of Peace, and Warre, and making of
Lawes, in the same condition, as if the Government were in a Child. For
as a Child wants the judgement to dissent from counsell given him, and
is thereby necessitated to take the advise of them, or him, to whom he
is committed: So an Assembly wanteth the liberty, to dissent from the
counsell of the major part, be it good, or bad. And as a Child has need
of a Tutor, or Protector, to preserve his Person, and Authority: So also
(in great Common-wealths,) the Soveraign Assembly, in all great dangers
and troubles, have need of Custodes Libertatis; that is of Dictators, or
Protectors of their Authoritie; which are as much as Temporary Monarchs;
to whom for a time, they may commit the entire exercise of their Power;
and have (at the end of that time) been oftner deprived thereof, than
Infant Kings, by their Protectors, Regents, or any other Tutors.

Though the Kinds of Soveraigntie be, as I have now shewn, but three;
that is to say, Monarchie, where one Man has it; or Democracie, where
the generall Assembly of Subjects hath it; or Aristocracie, where it is
in an Assembly of certain persons nominated, or otherwise distinguished
from the rest: Yet he that shall consider the particular Common-wealthes
that have been, and are in the world, will not perhaps easily reduce
them to three, and may thereby be inclined to think there be other
Formes, arising from these mingled together. As for example, Elective
Kingdomes; where Kings have the Soveraigne Power put into their hands
for a time; of Kingdomes, wherein the King hath a power limited: which
Governments, are nevertheless by most Writers called Monarchie. Likewise
if a Popular, or Aristocraticall Common-wealth, subdue an Enemies
Countrie, and govern the same, by a President, Procurator, or
other Magistrate; this may seeme perhaps at first sight, to be a
Democraticall, or Aristocraticall Government. But it is not so. For
Elective Kings, are not Soveraignes, but Ministers of the Soveraigne;
nor limited Kings Soveraignes, but Ministers of them that have the
Soveraigne Power: nor are those Provinces which are in subjection to a
Democracie, or Aristocracie of another Common-wealth, Democratically, or
Aristocratically governed, but Monarchically.

And first, concerning an Elective King, whose power is limited to
his life, as it is in many places of Christendome at this day; or to
certaine Yeares or Moneths, as the Dictators power amongst the Romans;
If he have Right to appoint his Successor, he is no more Elective but
Hereditary. But if he have no Power to elect his Successor, then there
is some other Man, or Assembly known, which after his decease may elect
a new, or else the Common-wealth dieth, and dissolveth with him, and
returneth to the condition of Warre. If it be known who have the power
to give the Soveraigntie after his death, it is known also that the
Soveraigntie was in them before: For none have right to give that which
they have not right to possesse, and keep to themselves, if they think
good. But if there be none that can give the Soveraigntie, after the
decease of him that was first elected; then has he power, nay he is
obliged by the Law of Nature, to provide, by establishing his Successor,
to keep those that had trusted him with the Government, from relapsing
into the miserable condition of Civill warre. And consequently he was,
when elected, a Soveraign absolute.

Secondly, that King whose power is limited, is not superiour to him, or
them that have the power to limit it; and he that is not superiour, is
not supreme; that is to say not Soveraign. The Soveraignty therefore
was alwaies in that Assembly which had the Right to Limit him; and
by consequence the government not Monarchy, but either Democracy, or
Aristocracy; as of old time in Sparta; where the Kings had a priviledge
to lead their Armies; but the Soveraignty was in the Ephori.

Thirdly, whereas heretofore the Roman People, governed the land of Judea
(for example) by a President; yet was not Judea therefore a Democracy;
because they were not governed by any Assembly, into which, any of
them, had right to enter; nor by an Aristocracy; because they were
not governed by any Assembly, into which, any man could enter by their
Election: but they were governed by one Person, which though as to the
people of Rome was an Assembly of the people, or Democracy; yet as to
the people of Judea, which had no right at all of participating in the
government, was a Monarch. For though where the people are governed
by an Assembly, chosen by themselves out of their own number, the
government is called a Democracy, or Aristocracy; yet when they are
governed by an Assembly, not of their own choosing, ’tis a Monarchy; not
of One man, over another man; but of one people, over another people.




Of The Right Of Succession

Of all these Formes of Government, the matter being mortall, so that not
onely Monarchs, but also whole Assemblies dy, it is necessary for the
conservation of the peace of men, that as there was order taken for
an Artificiall Man, so there be order also taken, for an Artificiall
Eternity of life; without which, men that are governed by an Assembly,
should return into the condition of Warre in every age; and they
that are governed by One man, as soon as their Governour dyeth. This
Artificiall Eternity, is that which men call the Right of Succession.

There is no perfect forme of Government, where the disposing of the
Succession is not in the present Soveraign. For if it be in any other
particular Man, or private Assembly, it is in a person subject, and may
be assumed by the Soveraign at his pleasure; and consequently the Right
is in himselfe. And if it be in no particular man, but left to a new
choyce; then is the Common-wealth dissolved; and the Right is in him
that can get it; contrary to the intention of them that did institute
the Common-wealth, for their perpetuall, and not temporary security.

In a Democracy, the whole Assembly cannot faile, unlesse the Multitude
that are to be governed faile. And therefore questions of the right of
Succession, have in that forme of Government no place at all.

In an Aristocracy, when any of the Assembly dyeth, the election of
another into his room belongeth to the Assembly, as the Soveraign, to
whom belongeth the choosing of all Counsellours, and Officers. For that
which the Representative doth, as Actor, every one of the Subjects doth,
as Author. And though the Soveraign assembly, may give Power to others,
to elect new men, for supply of their Court; yet it is still by their
Authority, that the Election is made; and by the same it may (when the
publique shall require it) be recalled.

The Present Monarch Hath Right To Dispose Of The Succession The greatest
difficultie about the right of Succession, is in Monarchy: And the
difficulty ariseth from this, that at first sight, it is not manifest
who is to appoint the Successor; nor many times, who it is whom he
hath appointed. For in both these cases, there is required a more exact
ratiocination, than every man is accustomed to use. As to the question,
who shall appoint the Successor, of a Monarch that hath the Soveraign
Authority; that is to say, (for Elective Kings and Princes have not the
Soveraign Power in propriety, but in use only,) we are to consider, that
either he that is in possession, has right to dispose of the Succession,
or else that right is again in the dissolved Multitude. For the death
of him that hath the Soveraign power in propriety, leaves the Multitude
without any Soveraign at all; that is, without any Representative in
whom they should be united, and be capable of doing any one action at
all: And therefore they are incapable of Election of any new Monarch;
every man having equall right to submit himselfe to such as he thinks
best able to protect him, or if he can, protect himselfe by his owne
sword; which is a returne to Confusion, and to the condition of a War of
every man against every man, contrary to the end for which Monarchy had
its first Institution. Therfore it is manifest, that by the Institution
of Monarchy, the disposing of the Successor, is alwaies left to the
Judgment and Will of the present Possessor.

And for the question (which may arise sometimes) who it is that the
Monarch in possession, hath designed to the succession and inheritance
of his power; it is determined by his expresse Words, and Testament; or
by other tacite signes sufficient.




Succession Passeth By Expresse Words;

By expresse Words, or Testament, when it is declared by him in his life
time, viva voce, or by Writing; as the first Emperours of Rome declared
who should be their Heires. For the word Heire does not of it selfe
imply the Children, or nearest Kindred of a man; but whomsoever a man
shall any way declare, he would have to succeed him in his Estate.
If therefore a Monarch declare expresly, that such a man shall be his
Heire, either by Word or Writing, then is that man immediately after the
decease of his Predecessor, Invested in the right of being Monarch.




Or, By Not Controlling A Custome;

But where Testament, and expresse Words are wanting, other naturall
signes of the Will are to be followed: whereof the one is Custome. And
therefore where the Custome is, that the next of Kindred absolutely
succeedeth, there also the next of Kindred hath right to the Succession;
for that, if the will of him that was in posession had been otherwise,
he might easily have declared the same in his life time. And likewise
where the Custome is, that the next of the Male Kindred succeedeth,
there also the right of Succession is in the next of the Kindred Male,
for the same reason. And so it is if the Custome were to advance the
Female. For whatsoever Custome a man may by a word controule, and does
not, it is a naturall signe he would have that Custome stand.




Or, By Presumption Of Naturall Affection

But where neither Custome, nor Testament hath preceded, there it is
to be understood, First, that a Monarchs will is, that the government
remain Monarchicall; because he hath approved that government in
himselfe. Secondly, that a Child of his own, Male, or Female, be
preferred before any other; because men are presumed to be more enclined
by nature, to advance their own children, than the children of other
men; and of their own, rather a Male than a Female; because men, are
naturally fitter than women, for actions of labour and danger. Thirdly,
where his own Issue faileth, rather a Brother than a stranger; and so
still the neerer in bloud, rather than the more remote, because it is
alwayes presumed that the neerer of kin, is the neerer in affection; and
’tis evident that a man receives alwayes, by reflexion, the most honour
from the greatnesse of his neerest kindred.




To Dispose Of The Succession, Though To A King Of Another Nation, Not
Unlawfull

But if it be lawfull for a Monarch to dispose of the Succession by words
of Contract, or Testament, men may perhaps object a great inconvenience:
for he may sell, or give his Right of governing to a stranger; which,
because strangers (that is, men not used to live under the same
government, not speaking the same language) do commonly undervalue one
another, may turn to the oppression of his Subjects; which is indeed
a great inconvenience; but it proceedeth not necessarily from the
subjection to a strangers government, but from the unskilfulnesse of the
Governours, ignorant of the true rules of Politiques. And therefore
the Romans when they had subdued many Nations, to make their Government
digestible, were wont to take away that grievance, as much as they
thought necessary, by giving sometimes to whole Nations, and sometimes
to Principall men of every Nation they conquered, not onely the
Privileges, but also the Name of Romans; and took many of them into the
Senate, and Offices of charge, even in the Roman City. And this was it
our most wise King, King James, aymed at, in endeavouring the Union of
his two Realms of England and Scotland. Which if he could have obtained,
had in all likelihood prevented the Civill warres, which make both those
Kingdomes at this present, miserable. It is not therefore any injury to
the people, for a Monarch to dispose of the Succession by Will; though
by the fault of many Princes, it hath been sometimes found inconvenient.
Of the lawfulnesse of it, this also is an argument, that whatsoever
inconvenience can arrive by giving a Kingdome to a stranger, may arrive
also by so marrying with strangers, as the Right of Succession may
descend upon them: yet this by all men is accounted lawfull.



CHAPTER XX. OF DOMINION PATERNALL AND DESPOTICALL


A Common-wealth by Acquisition, is that, where the Soveraign Power is
acquired by Force; And it is acquired by force, when men singly, or
many together by plurality of voyces, for fear of death, or bonds, do
authorise all the actions of that Man, or Assembly, that hath their
lives and liberty in his Power.




Wherein Different From A Common-wealth By Institution

And this kind of Dominion, or Soveraignty, differeth from Soveraignty by
Institution, onely in this, That men who choose their Soveraign, do it
for fear of one another, and not of him whom they Institute: But in this
case, they subject themselves, to him they are afraid of. In both cases
they do it for fear: which is to be noted by them, that hold all such
Covenants, as proceed from fear of death, or violence, voyd: which if
it were true, no man, in any kind of Common-wealth, could be obliged
to Obedience. It is true, that in a Common-wealth once Instituted, or
acquired, Promises proceeding from fear of death, or violence, are no
Covenants, nor obliging, when the thing promised is contrary to the
Lawes; But the reason is not, because it was made upon fear, but because
he that promiseth, hath no right in the thing promised. Also, when he
may lawfully performe, and doth not, it is not the Invalidity of
the Covenant, that absolveth him, but the Sentence of the Soveraign.
Otherwise, whensoever a man lawfully promiseth, he unlawfully breaketh:
But when the Soveraign, who is the Actor, acquitteth him, then he is
acquitted by him that exorted the promise, as by the Author of such
absolution.




The Rights Of Soveraignty The Same In Both

But the Rights, and Consequences of Soveraignty, are the same in both.
His Power cannot, without his consent, be Transferred to another: He
cannot Forfeit it: He cannot be Accused by any of his Subjects, of
Injury: He cannot be Punished by them: He is Judge of what is necessary
for Peace; and Judge of Doctrines: He is Sole Legislator; and Supreme
Judge of Controversies; and of the Times, and Occasions of Warre,
and Peace: to him it belongeth to choose Magistrates, Counsellours,
Commanders, and all other Officers, and Ministers; and to determine of
Rewards, and punishments, Honour, and Order. The reasons whereof, are
the same which are alledged in the precedent Chapter, for the same
Rights, and Consequences of Soveraignty by Institution.




Dominion Paternall How Attained Not By Generation, But By Contract

Dominion is acquired two wayes; By Generation, and by Conquest. The
right of Dominion by Generation, is that, which the Parent hath over
his Children; and is called PATERNALL. And is not so derived from the
Generation, as if therefore the Parent had Dominion over his Child
because he begat him; but from the Childs Consent, either expresse, or
by other sufficient arguments declared. For as to the Generation, God
hath ordained to man a helper; and there be alwayes two that are equally
Parents: the Dominion therefore over the Child, should belong equally to
both; and he be equally subject to both, which is impossible; for no man
can obey two Masters. And whereas some have attributed the Dominion to
the Man onely, as being of the more excellent Sex; they misreckon in it.
For there is not always that difference of strength or prudence between
the man and the woman, as that the right can be determined without War.
In Common-wealths, this controversie is decided by the Civill Law: and
for the most part, (but not alwayes) the sentence is in favour of the
Father; because for the most part Common-wealths have been erected by
the Fathers, not by the Mothers of families. But the question lyeth
now in the state of meer Nature; where there are supposed no lawes
of Matrimony; no lawes for the Education of Children; but the Law of
Nature, and the naturall inclination of the Sexes, one to another, and
to their children. In this condition of meer Nature, either the Parents
between themselves dispose of the dominion over the Child by Contract;
or do not dispose thereof at all. If they dispose thereof, the right
passeth according to the Contract. We find in History that the Amazons
Contracted with the Men of the neighbouring Countries, to whom they had
recourse for issue, that the issue Male should be sent back, but the
Female remain with themselves: so that the dominion of the Females was
in the Mother.




Or Education;

If there be no Contract, the Dominion is in the Mother. For in the
condition of Meer Nature, where there are no Matrimoniall lawes, it
cannot be known who is the Father, unlesse it be declared by the Mother:
and therefore the right of Dominion over the Child dependeth on her
will, and is consequently hers. Again, seeing the Infant is first in the
power of the Mother; so as she may either nourish, or expose it, if she
nourish it, it oweth its life to the Mother; and is therefore obliged to
obey her, rather than any other; and by consequence the Dominion over
it is hers. But if she expose it, and another find, and nourish it, the
Dominion is in him that nourisheth it. For it ought to obey him by whom
it is preserved; because preservation of life being the end, for which
one man becomes subject to another, every man is supposed to promise
obedience, to him, in whose power it is to save, or destroy him.




Or Precedent Subjection Of One Of The Parents To The Other

If the Mother be the Fathers subject, the Child, is in the Fathers
power: and if the Father be the Mothers subject, (as when a Soveraign
Queen marrieth one of her subjects,) the Child is subject to the Mother;
because the Father also is her subject.

If a man and a woman, Monarches of two severall Kingdomes, have a Child,
and contract concerning who shall have the Dominion of him, the Right of
the Dominion passeth by the Contract. If they contract not, the Dominion
followeth the Dominion of the place of his residence. For the Soveraign
of each Country hath Dominion over all that reside therein.

He that hath the Dominion over the Child, hath Dominion also over their
Childrens Children. For he that hath Dominion over the person of a man,
hath Dominion over all that is his; without which, Dominion were but a
Title, without the effect.




The Right Of Succession Followeth The Rules Of The Rights Of Possession

The Right of Succession to Paternall dominion, proceedeth in the same
manner, as doth the Right of Succession to Monarchy; of which I have
already sufficiently spoken in the precedent chapter.




Despoticall Dominion, How Attained

Dominion acquired by Conquest, or Victory in war, is that which some
Writers call DESPOTICALL, from Despotes, which signifieth a Lord, or
Master; and is the Dominion of the Master over his Servant. And this
Dominion is then acquired to the Victor, when the Vanquished, to avoyd
the present stroke of death, covenanteth either in expresse words, or by
other sufficient signes of the Will, that so long as his life, and
the liberty of his body is allowed him, the Victor shall have the use
thereof, at his pleasure. And after such Covenant made, the Vanquished
is a SERVANT, and not before: for by the word Servant (whether it be
derived from Servire, to Serve, or from Servare, to Save, which I leave
to Grammarians to dispute) is not meant a Captive, which is kept in
prison, or bonds, till the owner of him that took him, or bought him
of one that did, shall consider what to do with him: (for such men,
(commonly called Slaves,) have no obligation at all; but may break their
bonds, or the prison; and kill, or carry away captive their Master,
justly:) but one, that being taken, hath corporall liberty allowed him;
and upon promise not to run away, nor to do violence to his Master, is
trusted by him.




Not By The Victory, But By The Consent Of The Vanquished

It is not therefore the Victory, that giveth the right of Dominion over
the Vanquished, but his own Covenant. Nor is he obliged because he is
Conquered; that is to say, beaten, and taken, or put to flight; but
because he commeth in, and submitteth to the Victor; Nor is the Victor
obliged by an enemies rendring himselfe, (without promise of life,) to
spare him for this his yeelding to discretion; which obliges not the
Victor longer, than in his own discretion hee shall think fit.

And that men do, when they demand (as it is now called) Quarter, (which
the Greeks called Zogria, taking alive,) is to evade the present fury of
the Victor, by Submission, and to compound for their life, with Ransome,
or Service: and therefore he that hath Quarter, hath not his life given,
but deferred till farther deliberation; For it is not an yeelding on
condition of life, but to discretion. And then onely is his life in
security, and his service due, when the Victor hath trusted him with his
corporall liberty. For Slaves that work in Prisons, or Fetters, do it
not of duty, but to avoyd the cruelty of their task-masters.

The Master of the Servant, is Master also of all he hath; and may exact
the use thereof; that is to say, of his goods, of his labour, of his
servants, and of his children, as often as he shall think fit. For he
holdeth his life of his Master, by the covenant of obedience; that is,
of owning, and authorising whatsoever the Master shall do. And in case
the Master, if he refuse, kill him, or cast him into bonds, or otherwise
punish him for his disobedience, he is himselfe the author of the same;
and cannot accuse him of injury.

In summe the Rights and Consequences of both Paternall and Despoticall
Dominion, are the very same with those of a Soveraign by Institution;
and for the same reasons: which reasons are set down in the precedent
chapter. So that for a man that is Monarch of divers Nations, whereof he
hath, in one the Soveraignty by Institution of the people assembled, and
in another by Conquest, that is by the Submission of each particular,
to avoyd death or bonds; to demand of one Nation more than of the other,
from the title of Conquest, as being a Conquered Nation, is an act of
ignorance of the Rights of Soveraignty. For the Soveraign is absolute
over both alike; or else there is no Soveraignty at all; and so every
man may Lawfully protect himselfe, if he can, with his own sword, which
is the condition of war.




Difference Between A Family And A Kingdom

By this it appears, that a great Family if it be not part of some
Common-wealth, is of it self, as to the Rights of Soveraignty, a little
Monarchy; whether that Family consist of a man and his children; or of
a man and his servants; or of a man, and his children, and servants
together: wherein the Father of Master is the Soveraign. But yet a
Family is not properly a Common-wealth; unlesse it be of that power by
its own number, or by other opportunities, as not to be subdued without
the hazard of war. For where a number of men are manifestly too weak to
defend themselves united, every one may use his own reason in time of
danger, to save his own life, either by flight, or by submission to
the enemy, as hee shall think best; in the same manner as a very small
company of souldiers, surprised by an army, may cast down their armes,
and demand quarter, or run away, rather than be put to the sword. And
thus much shall suffice; concerning what I find by speculation, and
deduction, of Soveraign Rights, from the nature, need, and designes
of men, in erecting of Commonwealths, and putting themselves under
Monarchs, or Assemblies, entrusted with power enough for their
protection.




The Right Of Monarchy From Scripture

Let us now consider what the Scripture teacheth in the same point. To
Moses, the children of Israel say thus. (Exod. 20. 19) "Speak thou to
us, and we will heare thee; but let not God speak to us, lest we dye."
This is absolute obedience to Moses. Concerning the Right of Kings, God
himself by the mouth of Samuel, saith, (1 Sam. 8. 11, 12, &c.) "This
shall be the Right of the King you will have to reigne over you. He
shall take your sons, and set them to drive his Chariots, and to be his
horsemen, and to run before his chariots; and gather in his harvest; and
to make his engines of War, and Instruments of his chariots; and shall
take your daughters to make perfumes, to be his Cookes, and Bakers. He
shall take your fields, your vine-yards, and your olive-yards, and give
them to his servants. He shall take the tyth of your corne and wine, and
give it to the men of his chamber, and to his other servants. He shall
take your man-servants, and your maid-servants, and the choice of your
youth, and employ them in his businesse. He shall take the tyth of your
flocks; and you shall be his servants." This is absolute power, and
summed up in the last words, "you shall be his servants." Againe, when
the people heard what power their King was to have, yet they consented
thereto, and say thus, (Verse. 19 &c.) "We will be as all other nations,
and our King shall judge our causes, and goe before us, to conduct our
wars." Here is confirmed the Right that Soveraigns have, both to the
Militia, and to all Judicature; in which is conteined as absolute power,
as one man can possibly transferre to another. Again, the prayer of
King Salomon to God, was this. (1 Kings 3. 9) "Give to thy servant
understanding, to judge thy people, and to discerne between Good and
Evill." It belongeth therefore to the Soveraigne to bee Judge, and
to praescribe the Rules of Discerning Good and Evill; which Rules are
Lawes; and therefore in him is the Legislative Power. Saul sought
the life of David; yet when it was in his power to slay Saul, and his
Servants would have done it, David forbad them, saying (1 Sam. 24. 9)
"God forbid I should do such an act against my Lord, the anoynted of
God." For obedience of servants St. Paul saith, (Coll. 3. 20) "Servants
obey your masters in All things," and, (Verse. 22) "Children obey your
Parents in All things." There is simple obedience in those that are
subject to Paternall, or Despoticall Dominion. Again, (Math. 23. 2,3)
"The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chayre and therefore All that
they shall bid you observe, that observe and do." There again is simple
obedience. And St. Paul, (Tit. 3. 2) "Warn them that they subject
themselves to Princes, and to those that are in Authority, & obey
them." This obedience is also simple. Lastly, our Saviour himselfe
acknowledges, that men ought to pay such taxes as are by Kings imposed,
where he sayes, "Give to Caesar that which is Caesars;" and payed such
taxes himselfe. And that the Kings word, is sufficient to take any thing
from any subject, when there is need; and that the King is Judge of that
need: For he himselfe, as King of the Jewes, commanded his Disciples to
take the Asse, and Asses Colt to carry him into Jerusalem, saying, (Mat.
21. 2,3) "Go into the Village over against you, and you shall find a
shee Asse tyed, and her Colt with her, unty them, and bring them to me.
And if any man ask you, what you mean by it, Say the Lord hath need
of them: And they will let them go." They will not ask whether his
necessity be a sufficient title; nor whether he be judge of that
necessity; but acquiesce in the will of the Lord.

To these places may be added also that of Genesis, (Gen. 3. 5) "You
shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evill." and verse 11. "Who told thee
that thou wast naked? hast thou eaten of the tree, of which I commanded
thee thou shouldest not eat?" For the Cognisance of Judicature of Good
and Evill, being forbidden by the name of the fruit of the tree of
Knowledge, as a triall of Adams obedience; The Divell to enflame the
Ambition of the woman, to whom that fruit already seemed beautifull,
told her that by tasting it, they should be as Gods, knowing Good and
Evill. Whereupon having both eaten, they did indeed take upon them
Gods office, which is Judicature of Good and Evill; but acquired no new
ability to distinguish between them aright. And whereas it is sayd, that
having eaten, they saw they were naked; no man hath so interpreted that
place, as if they had formerly blind, as saw not their own skins: the
meaning is plain, that it was then they first judged their nakednesse
(wherein it was Gods will to create them) to be uncomely; and by being
ashamed, did tacitely censure God himselfe. And thereupon God saith,
"Hast thou eaten, &c." as if he should say, doest thou that owest me
obedience, take upon thee to judge of my Commandements? Whereby it is
cleerly, (though Allegorically,) signified, that the Commands of
them that have the right to command, are not by their Subjects to be
censured, nor disputed.




Soveraign Power Ought In All Common-wealths To Be Absolute

So it appeareth plainly, to my understanding, both from Reason, and
Scripture, that the Soveraign Power, whether placed in One Man, as in
Monarchy, or in one Assembly of men, as in Popular, and Aristocraticall
Common-wealths, is as great, as possibly men can be imagined to make
it. And though of so unlimited a Power, men may fancy many evill
consequences, yet the consequences of the want of it, which is
perpetuall warre of every man against his neighbour, are much worse. The
condition of man in this life shall never be without Inconveniences; but
there happeneth in no Common-wealth any great Inconvenience, but what
proceeds from the Subjects disobedience, and breach of those Covenants,
from which the Common-wealth had its being. And whosoever thinking
Soveraign Power too great, will seek to make it lesse; must subject
himselfe, to the Power, that can limit it; that is to say, to a greater.

The greatest objection is, that of the Practise; when men ask, where,
and when, such Power has by Subjects been acknowledged. But one may
ask them again, when, or where has there been a Kingdome long free from
Sedition and Civill Warre. In those Nations, whose Common-wealths have
been long-lived, and not been destroyed, but by forraign warre, the
Subjects never did dispute of the Soveraign Power. But howsoever, an
argument for the Practise of men, that have not sifted to the bottom,
and with exact reason weighed the causes, and nature of Common-wealths,
and suffer daily those miseries, that proceed from the ignorance
thereof, is invalid. For though in all places of the world, men should
lay the foundation of their houses on the sand, it could not thence be
inferred, that so it ought to be. The skill of making, and maintaining
Common-wealths, consisteth in certain Rules, as doth Arithmetique and
Geometry; not (as Tennis-play) on Practise onely: which Rules, neither
poor men have the leisure, nor men that have had the leisure, have
hitherto had the curiosity, or the method to find out.



CHAPTER XXI. OF THE LIBERTY OF SUBJECTS




Liberty What

Liberty, or FREEDOME, signifieth (properly) the absence of Opposition;
(by Opposition, I mean externall Impediments of motion;) and may
be applyed no lesse to Irrational, and Inanimate creatures, than to
Rationall. For whatsoever is so tyed, or environed, as it cannot move,
but within a certain space, which space is determined by the opposition
of some externall body, we say it hath not Liberty to go further. And
so of all living creatures, whilest they are imprisoned, or restrained,
with walls, or chayns; and of the water whilest it is kept in by banks,
or vessels, that otherwise would spread it selfe into a larger space, we
use to say, they are not at Liberty, to move in such manner, as without
those externall impediments they would. But when the impediment of
motion, is in the constitution of the thing it selfe, we use not to
say, it wants the Liberty; but the Power to move; as when a stone lyeth
still, or a man is fastned to his bed by sicknesse.




What It Is To Be Free

And according to this proper, and generally received meaning of the
word, A FREE-MAN, is "he, that in those things, which by his strength
and wit he is able to do, is not hindred to doe what he has a will
to." But when the words Free, and Liberty, are applyed to any thing but
Bodies, they are abused; for that which is not subject to Motion, is not
subject to Impediment: And therefore, when ’tis said (for example) The
way is free, no liberty of the way is signified, but of those that walk
in it without stop. And when we say a Guift is free, there is not meant
any liberty of the Guift, but of the Giver, that was not bound by any
law, or Covenant to give it. So when we Speak Freely, it is not the
liberty of voice, or pronunciation, but of the man, whom no law hath
obliged to speak otherwise then he did. Lastly, from the use of the
word Freewill, no liberty can be inferred to the will, desire, or
inclination, but the liberty of the man; which consisteth in this, that
he finds no stop, in doing what he has the will, desire, or inclination
to doe.




Feare And Liberty Consistent

Feare and Liberty are consistent; as when a man throweth his goods into
the Sea for Feare the ship should sink, he doth it neverthelesse very
willingly, and may refuse to doe it if he will: It is therefore the
action, of one that was Free; so a man sometimes pays his debt, only for
Feare of Imprisonment, which because no body hindred him from detaining,
was the action of a man at Liberty. And generally all actions which men
doe in Common-wealths, for Feare of the law, or actions, which the doers
had Liberty to omit.




Liberty And Necessity Consistent

Liberty and Necessity are Consistent: As in the water, that hath not
only Liberty, but a Necessity of descending by the Channel: so likewise
in the Actions which men voluntarily doe; which (because they proceed
from their will) proceed from Liberty; and yet because every act of
mans will, and every desire, and inclination proceedeth from some cause,
which causes in a continuall chaine (whose first link in the hand of
God the first of all causes) proceed from Necessity. So that to him
that could see the connexion of those causes, the Necessity of all
mens voluntary actions, would appeare manifest. And therefore God, that
seeth, and disposeth all things, seeth also that the Liberty of man
in doing what he will, is accompanied with the Necessity of doing that
which God will, & no more, nor lesse. For though men may do many things,
which God does not command, nor is therefore Author of them; yet they
can have no passion, nor appetite to any thing, of which appetite Gods
will is not the cause. And did not his will assure the Necessity of mans
will, and consequently of all that on mans will dependeth, the Liberty
of men would be a contradiction, and impediment to the omnipotence and
Liberty of God. And this shall suffice, (as to the matter in hand) of
that naturall Liberty, which only is properly called Liberty.




Artificiall Bonds, Or Covenants

But as men, for the atteyning of peace, and conservation of themselves
thereby, have made an Artificiall Man, which we call a Common-wealth; so
also have they made Artificiall Chains, called Civill Lawes, which they
themselves, by mutuall covenants, have fastned at one end, to the lips
of that Man, or Assembly, to whom they have given the Soveraigne Power;
and at the other end to their own Ears. These Bonds in their own nature
but weak, may neverthelesse be made to hold, by the danger, though not
by the difficulty of breaking them.




Liberty Of Subjects Consisteth In Liberty From Covenants

In relation to these Bonds only it is, that I am to speak now, of the
Liberty of Subjects. For seeing there is no Common-wealth in the world,
for the regulating of all the actions, and words of men, (as being
a thing impossible:) it followeth necessarily, that in all kinds of
actions, by the laws praetermitted, men have the Liberty, of doing what
their own reasons shall suggest, for the most profitable to themselves.
For if wee take Liberty in the proper sense, for corporall Liberty; that
is to say, freedome from chains, and prison, it were very absurd for men
to clamor as they doe, for the Liberty they so manifestly enjoy. Againe,
if we take Liberty, for an exemption from Lawes, it is no lesse absurd,
for men to demand as they doe, that Liberty, by which all other men may
be masters of their lives. And yet as absurd as it is, this is it they
demand; not knowing that the Lawes are of no power to protect them,
without a Sword in the hands of a man, or men, to cause those laws to
be put in execution. The Liberty of a Subject, lyeth therefore only
in those things, which in regulating their actions, the Soveraign hath
praetermitted; such as is the Liberty to buy, and sell, and otherwise
contract with one another; to choose their own aboad, their own diet,
their own trade of life, and institute their children as they themselves
think fit; & the like.




Liberty Of The Subject Consistent With Unlimited Power Of The Soveraign

Neverthelesse we are not to understand, that by such Liberty, the
Soveraign Power of life, and death, is either abolished, or limited. For
it has been already shewn, that nothing the Soveraign Representative
can doe to a Subject, on what pretence soever, can properly be called
Injustice, or Injury; because every Subject is Author of every act the
Soveraign doth; so that he never wanteth Right to any thing, otherwise,
than as he himself is the Subject of God, and bound thereby to observe
the laws of Nature. And therefore it may, and doth often happen in
Common-wealths, that a Subject may be put to death, by the command of
the Soveraign Power; and yet neither doe the other wrong: as when Jeptha
caused his daughter to be sacrificed: In which, and the like cases,
he that so dieth, had Liberty to doe the action, for which he is
neverthelesse, without Injury put to death. And the same holdeth also
in a Soveraign Prince, that putteth to death an Innocent Subject. For
though the action be against the law of Nature, as being contrary to
Equitie, (as was the killing of Uriah, by David;) yet it was not an
Injurie to Uriah; but to God. Not to Uriah, because the right to doe
what he pleased, was given him by Uriah himself; And yet to God, because
David was Gods Subject; and prohibited all Iniquitie by the law of
Nature. Which distinction, David himself, when he repented the fact,
evidently confirmed, saying, "To thee only have I sinned." In the same
manner, the people of Athens, when they banished the most potent of
their Common-wealth for ten years, thought they committed no Injustice;
and yet they never questioned what crime he had done; but what hurt he
would doe: Nay they commanded the banishment of they knew not whom; and
every Citizen bringing his Oystershell into the market place, written
with the name of him he desired should be banished, without actuall
accusing him, sometimes banished an Aristides, for his reputation of
Justice; And sometimes a scurrilous Jester, as Hyperbolus, to make a
Jest of it. And yet a man cannot say, the Soveraign People of Athens
wanted right to banish them; or an Athenian the Libertie to Jest, or to
be Just.




The Liberty Which Writers Praise, Is The Liberty Of Soveraigns; Not Of
Private Men

The Libertie, whereof there is so frequent, and honourable mention, in
the Histories, and Philosophy of the Antient Greeks, and Romans, and in
the writings, and discourse of those that from them have received all
their learning in the Politiques, is not the Libertie of Particular
men; but the Libertie of the Common-wealth: which is the same with
that, which every man then should have, if there were no Civil Laws,
nor Common-wealth at all. And the effects of it also be the same. For as
amongst masterlesse men, there is perpetuall war, of every man against
his neighbour; no inheritance, to transmit to the Son, nor to expect
from the Father; no propriety of Goods, or Lands; no security; but a
full and absolute Libertie in every Particular man: So in States, and
Common-wealths not dependent on one another, every Common-wealth, (not
every man) has an absolute Libertie, to doe what it shall judge (that is
to say, what that Man, or Assemblie that representeth it, shall judge)
most conducing to their benefit. But withall, they live in the condition
of a perpetuall war, and upon the confines of battel, with their
frontiers armed, and canons planted against their neighbours
round about. The Athenians, and Romanes, were free; that is, free
Common-wealths: not that any particular men had the Libertie to resist
their own Representative; but that their Representative had the Libertie
to resist, or invade other people. There is written on the Turrets of
the city of Luca in great characters at this day, the word LIBERTAS; yet
no man can thence inferre, that a particular man has more Libertie,
or Immunitie from the service of the Commonwealth there, than in
Constantinople. Whether a Common-wealth be Monarchicall, or Popular, the
Freedome is still the same.

But it is an easy thing, for men to be deceived, by the specious name
of Libertie; and for want of Judgement to distinguish, mistake that for
their Private Inheritance, and Birth right, which is the right of the
Publique only. And when the same errour is confirmed by the authority of
men in reputation for their writings in this subject, it is no wonder if
it produce sedition, and change of Government. In these westerne
parts of the world, we are made to receive our opinions concerning the
Institution, and Rights of Common-wealths, from Aristotle, Cicero, and
other men, Greeks and Romanes, that living under Popular States, derived
those Rights, not from the Principles of Nature, but transcribed them
into their books, out of the Practice of their own Common-wealths, which
were Popular; as the Grammarians describe the Rules of Language, out of
the Practise of the time; or the Rules of Poetry, out of the Poems of
Homer and Virgil. And because the Athenians were taught, (to keep them
from desire of changing their Government,) that they were Freemen, and
all that lived under Monarchy were slaves; therefore Aristotle puts it
down in his Politiques,(lib.6.cap.2) "In democracy, Liberty is to be
supposed: for ’tis commonly held, that no man is Free in any other
Government." And as Aristotle; so Cicero, and other Writers have
grounded their Civill doctrine, on the opinions of the Romans, who were
taught to hate Monarchy, at first, by them that having deposed their
Soveraign, shared amongst them the Soveraignty of Rome; and afterwards
by their Successors. And by reading of these Greek, and Latine Authors,
men from their childhood have gotten a habit (under a false shew of
Liberty,) of favouring tumults, and of licentious controlling the
actions of their Soveraigns; and again of controlling those controllers,
with the effusion of so much blood; as I think I may truly say, there
was never any thing so deerly bought, as these Western parts have bought
the learning of the Greek and Latine tongues.




Liberty Of The Subject How To Be Measured

To come now to the particulars of the true Liberty of a Subject; that is
to say, what are the things, which though commanded by the Soveraign, he
may neverthelesse, without Injustice, refuse to do; we are to consider,
what Rights we passe away, when we make a Common-wealth; or (which is
all one,) what Liberty we deny our selves, by owning all the Actions
(without exception) of the Man, or Assembly we make our Soveraign. For
in the act of our Submission, consisteth both our Obligation, and
our Liberty; which must therefore be inferred by arguments taken from
thence; there being no Obligation on any man, which ariseth not from
some Act of his own; for all men equally, are by Nature Free. And
because such arguments, must either be drawn from the expresse words, "I
Authorise all his Actions," or from the Intention of him that submitteth
himselfe to his Power, (which Intention is to be understood by the End
for which he so submitteth;) The Obligation, and Liberty of the Subject,
is to be derived, either from those Words, (or others equivalent;) or
else from the End of the Institution of Soveraignty; namely, the Peace
of the Subjects within themselves, and their Defence against a common
Enemy.




Subjects Have Liberty To Defend Their Own Bodies, Even Against Them
That Lawfully Invade Them

First therefore, seeing Soveraignty by Institution, is by Covenant of
every one to every one; and Soveraignty by Acquisition, by Covenants of
the Vanquished to the Victor, or Child to the Parent; It is manifest,
that every Subject has Liberty in all those things, the right whereof
cannot by Covenant be transferred. I have shewn before in the 14.
Chapter, that Covenants, not to defend a mans own body, are voyd.
Therefore,




Are Not Bound To Hurt Themselves;

If the Soveraign command a man (though justly condemned,) to kill,
wound, or mayme himselfe; or not to resist those that assault him; or
to abstain from the use of food, ayre, medicine, or any other thing,
without which he cannot live; yet hath that man the Liberty to disobey.

If a man be interrogated by the Soveraign, or his Authority, concerning
a crime done by himselfe, he is not bound (without assurance of Pardon)
to confesse it; because no man (as I have shewn in the same Chapter) can
be obliged by Covenant to accuse himselfe.

Again, the Consent of a Subject to Soveraign Power, is contained in
these words, "I Authorise, or take upon me, all his actions;" in which
there is no restriction at all, of his own former naturall Liberty:
For by allowing him to Kill Me, I am not bound to Kill my selfe when
he commands me. "’Tis one thing to say ‘Kill me, or my fellow, if you
please;’ another thing to say, ‘I will kill my selfe, or my fellow.’" It
followeth therefore, that

No man is bound by the words themselves, either to kill himselfe, or
any other man; And consequently, that the Obligation a man may sometimes
have, upon the Command of the Soveraign to execute any dangerous, or
dishonourable Office, dependeth not on the Words of our Submission; but
on the Intention; which is to be understood by the End thereof. When
therefore our refusall to obey, frustrates the End for which the
Soveraignty was ordained; then there is no Liberty to refuse: otherwise
there is.




Nor To Warfare, Unless They Voluntarily Undertake It

Upon this ground, a man that is commanded as a Souldier to fight against
the enemy, though his Soveraign have Right enough to punish his refusall
with death, may neverthelesse in many cases refuse, without Injustice;
as when he substituteth a sufficient Souldier in his place: for in this
case he deserteth not the service of the Common-wealth. And there is
allowance to be made for naturall timorousnesse, not onely to women, (of
whom no such dangerous duty is expected,) but also to men of feminine
courage. When Armies fight, there is on one side, or both, a running
away; yet when they do it not out of trechery, but fear, they are not
esteemed to do it unjustly, but dishonourably. For the same reason, to
avoyd battell, is not Injustice, but Cowardise. But he that inrowleth
himselfe a Souldier, or taketh imprest mony, taketh away the excuse of
a timorous nature; and is obliged, not onely to go to the battell,
but also not to run from it, without his Captaines leave. And when the
Defence of the Common-wealth, requireth at once the help of all that
are able to bear Arms, every one is obliged; because otherwise the
Institution of the Common-wealth, which they have not the purpose, or
courage to preserve, was in vain.

To resist the Sword of the Common-wealth, in defence of another man,
guilty, or innocent, no man hath Liberty; because such Liberty, takes
away from the Soveraign, the means of Protecting us; and is therefore
destructive of the very essence of Government. But in case a great many
men together, have already resisted the Soveraign Power Unjustly, or
committed some Capitall crime, for which every one of them expecteth
death, whether have they not the Liberty then to joyn together, and
assist, and defend one another? Certainly they have: For they but defend
their lives, which the guilty man may as well do, as the Innocent. There
was indeed injustice in the first breach of their duty; Their bearing of
Arms subsequent to it, though it be to maintain what they have done, is
no new unjust act. And if it be onely to defend their persons, it is not
unjust at all. But the offer of Pardon taketh from them, to whom it
is offered, the plea of self-defence, and maketh their perseverance in
assisting, or defending the rest, unlawfull.




The Greatest Liberty Of Subjects, Dependeth On The Silence Of The Law


As for other Lyberties, they depend on the silence of the Law. In cases
where the Soveraign has prescribed no rule, there the Subject hath
the liberty to do, or forbeare, according to his own discretion. And
therefore such Liberty is in some places more, and in some lesse; and in
some times more, in other times lesse, according as they that have the
Soveraignty shall think most convenient. As for Example, there was
a time, when in England a man might enter in to his own Land,
(and dispossesse such as wrongfully possessed it) by force. But in
after-times, that Liberty of Forcible entry, was taken away by a Statute
made (by the King) in Parliament. And is some places of the world, men
have the Liberty of many wives: in other places, such Liberty is not
allowed.

If a Subject have a controversie with his Soveraigne, of Debt, or
of right of possession of lands or goods, or concerning any service
required at his hands, or concerning any penalty corporall, or
pecuniary, grounded on a precedent Law; He hath the same Liberty to sue
for his right, as if it were against a Subject; and before such Judges,
as are appointed by the Soveraign. For seeing the Soveraign demandeth
by force of a former Law, and not by vertue of his Power; he declareth
thereby, that he requireth no more, than shall appear to be due by that
Law. The sute therefore is not contrary to the will of the Soveraign;
and consequently the Subject hath the Liberty to demand the hearing of
his Cause; and sentence, according to that Law. But if he demand, or
take any thing by pretence of his Power; there lyeth, in that case, no
action of Law: for all that is done by him in Vertue of his Power, is
done by the Authority of every subject, and consequently, he that brings
an action against the Soveraign, brings it against himselfe.

If a Monarch, or Soveraign Assembly, grant a Liberty to all, or any of
his Subjects; which Grant standing, he is disabled to provide for their
safety, the Grant is voyd; unlesse he directly renounce, or transferre
the Soveraignty to another. For in that he might openly, (if it had been
his will,) and in plain termes, have renounced, or transferred it, and
did not; it is to be understood it was not his will; but that the Grant
proceeded from ignorance of the repugnancy between such a Liberty and
the Soveraign Power; and therefore the Soveraignty is still retayned;
and consequently all those Powers, which are necessary to the exercising
thereof; such as are the Power of Warre, and Peace, of Judicature, of
appointing Officers, and Councellours, of levying Mony, and the rest
named in the 18th Chapter.




In What Cases Subjects Absolved Of Their Obedience To Their Soveraign

The Obligation of Subjects to the Soveraign is understood to last as
long, and no longer, than the power lasteth, by which he is able to
protect them. For the right men have by Nature to protect themselves,
when none else can protect them, can by no Covenant be relinquished. The
Soveraignty is the Soule of the Common-wealth; which once departed from
the Body, the members doe no more receive their motion from it. The end
of Obedience is Protection; which, wheresoever a man seeth it, either in
his own, or in anothers sword, Nature applyeth his obedience to it, and
his endeavour to maintaine it. And though Soveraignty, in the intention
of them that make it, be immortall; yet is it in its own nature, not
only subject to violent death, by forreign war; but also through
the ignorance, and passions of men, it hath in it, from the very
institution, many seeds of a naturall mortality, by Intestine Discord.




In Case Of Captivity

If a Subject be taken prisoner in war; or his person, or his means of
life be within the Guards of the enemy, and hath his life and corporall
Libertie given him, on condition to be Subject to the Victor, he hath
Libertie to accept the condition; and having accepted it, is the subject
of him that took him; because he had no other way to preserve himselfe.
The case is the same, if he be deteined on the same termes, in a
forreign country. But if a man be held in prison, or bonds, or is not
trusted with the libertie of his bodie; he cannot be understood to be
bound by Covenant to subjection; and therefore may, if he can, make his
escape by any means whatsoever.




In Case The Soveraign Cast Off The Government From Himself And Heyrs

If a Monarch shall relinquish the Soveraignty, both for himself, and
his heires; His Subjects returne to the absolute Libertie of Nature;
because, though Nature may declare who are his Sons, and who are the
nerest of his Kin; yet it dependeth on his own will, (as hath been said
in the precedent chapter,) who shall be his Heyr. If therefore he will
have no Heyre, there is no Soveraignty, nor Subjection. The case is the
same, if he dye without known Kindred, and without declaration of
his Heyre. For then there can no Heire be known, and consequently no
Subjection be due.




In Case Of Banishment

If the Soveraign Banish his Subject; during the Banishment, he is not
Subject. But he that is sent on a message, or hath leave to travell, is
still Subject; but it is, by Contract between Soveraigns, not by vertue
of the covenant of Subjection. For whosoever entreth into anothers
dominion, is Subject to all the Lawes thereof; unless he have a
privilege by the amity of the Soveraigns, or by speciall licence.




In Case The Soveraign Render Himself Subject To Another

If a Monarch subdued by war, render himself Subject to the Victor; his
Subjects are delivered from their former obligation, and become obliged
to the Victor. But if he be held prisoner, or have not the liberty
of his own Body; he is not understood to have given away the Right of
Soveraigntie; and therefore his Subjects are obliged to yield obedience
to the Magistrates formerly placed, governing not in their own name,
but in his. For, his Right remaining, the question is only of the
Administration; that is to say, of the Magistrates and Officers; which,
if he have not means to name, he is supposed to approve those, which he
himself had formerly appointed.



CHAPTER XXII. OF SYSTEMES SUBJECT, POLITICALL, AND PRIVATE




The Divers Sorts Of Systemes Of People

Having spoken of the Generation, Forme, and Power of a Common-wealth, I
am in order to speak next of the parts thereof. And first of Systemes,
which resemble the similar parts, or Muscles of a Body naturall. By
SYSTEMES; I understand any numbers of men joyned in one Interest, or one
Businesse. Of which, some are Regular, and some Irregular. Regular are
those, where one Man, or Assembly of men, is constituted Representative
of the whole number. All other are Irregular.

Of Regular, some are Absolute, and Independent, subject to none but
their own Representative: such are only Common-wealths; Of which I have
spoken already in the 5. last preceding chapters. Others are Dependent;
that is to say, Subordinate to some Soveraign Power, to which every one,
as also their Representative is Subject.

Of Systemes subordinate, some are Politicall, and some Private.
Politicall (otherwise Called Bodies Politique, and Persons In Law,)
are those, which are made by authority from the Soveraign Power of the
Common-wealth. Private, are those, which are constituted by Subjects
amongst themselves, or by authoritie from a stranger. For no authority
derived from forraign power, within the Dominion of another, is Publique
there, but Private.

And of Private Systemes, some are Lawfull; some Unlawfull: Lawfull, are
those which are allowed by the Common-wealth: all other are Unlawfull.
Irregular Systemes, are those which having no Representative,
consist only in concourse of People; which if not forbidden by the
Common-wealth, nor made on evill designe, (such as are conflux of People
to markets, or shews, or any other harmelesse end,) are Lawfull. But
when the Intention is evill, or (if the number be considerable) unknown,
they are Unlawfull.




In All Bodies Politique The Power Of The Representative Is Limited

In Bodies Politique, the power of the Representative is alwaies Limited:
And that which prescribeth the limits thereof, is the Power Soveraign.
For Power Unlimited, is absolute Soveraignty. And the Soveraign, in
every Commonwealth, is the absolute Representative of all the Subjects;
and therefore no other, can be Representative of any part of them,
but so far forth, as he shall give leave; And to give leave to a Body
Politique of Subjects, to have an absolute Representative to all
intents and purposes, were to abandon the Government of so much of the
Commonwealth, and to divide the Dominion, contrary to their Peace and
Defence, which the Soveraign cannot be understood to doe, by any Grant,
that does not plainly, and directly discharge them of their subjection.
For consequences of words, are not the signes of his will, when other
consequences are signes of the contrary; but rather signes of errour,
and misreckoning; to which all mankind is too prone.

The bounds of that Power, which is given to the Representative of a
Bodie Politique, are to be taken notice of, from two things. One is
their Writt, or Letters from the Soveraign: the other is the Law of the
Common-wealth.




By Letters Patents

For though in the Institution or Acquisition of a Common-wealth,
which is independent, there needs no Writing, because the Power of the
Representative has there no other bounds, but such as are set out by
the unwritten Law of Nature; yet in subordinate bodies, there are such
diversities of Limitation necessary, concerning their businesses, times,
and places, as can neither be remembred without Letters, nor taken
notice of, unlesse such Letters be Patent, that they may be read to
them, and withall sealed, or testified, with the Seales, or other
permanent signes of the Authority Soveraign.




And The Lawes

And because such Limitation is not alwaies easie, or perhaps possible
to be described in writing; the ordinary Lawes, common to all Subjects,
must determine, that the Representative may lawfully do, in all Cases,
where the Letters themselves are silent. And therefore




When The Representative Is One Man, His Unwarranted Acts His Own Onely

In a Body Politique, if the Representative be one man, whatsoever he
does in the Person of the Body, which is not warranted in his Letters,
nor by the Lawes, is his own act, and not the act of the Body, nor of
any other Member thereof besides himselfe: Because further than his
Letters, or the Lawes limit, he representeth no mans person, but his
own. But what he does according to these, is the act of every one: For
of the Act of the Soveraign every one is Author, because he is their
Representative unlimited; and the act of him that recedes not from the
Letters of the Soveraign, is the act of the Soveraign, and therefore
every member of the Body is Author of it.




When It Is An Assembly, It Is The Act Of Them That Assented Onely

But if the Representative be an Assembly, whatsoever that Assembly shall
Decree, not warranted by their Letters, or the Lawes, is the act of the
Assembly, or Body Politique, and the act of every one by whose Vote the
Decree was made; but not the act of any man that being present Voted to
the contrary; nor of any man absent, unlesse he Voted it by procuration.
It is the act of the Assembly, because Voted by the major part; and if
it be a crime, the Assembly may be punished, as farre-forth as it is
capable, as by dissolution, or forfeiture of their Letters (which is to
such artificiall, and fictitious Bodies, capitall,) or (if the
Assembly have a Common stock, wherein none of the Innocent Members have
propriety,) by pecuniary Mulct. For from corporall penalties Nature hath
exempted all Bodies Politique. But they that gave not their Vote, are
therefore Innocent, because the Assembly cannot Represent any man in
things unwarranted by their Letters, and consequently are not involved
in their Votes.

When The Representative Is One Man, If He Borrow Mony, Or Owe It, By
Contract; He Is Lyable Onely, The Members Not If the person of the Body
Politique being in one man, borrow mony of a stranger, that is, of one
that is not of the same Body, (for no Letters need limit borrowing,
seeing it is left to mens own inclinations to limit lending) the debt is
the Representatives. For if he should have Authority from his Letters,
to make the members pay what he borroweth, he should have by consequence
the Soveraignty of them; and therefore the grant were either voyd,
as proceeding from Errour, commonly incident to humane Nature, and an
unsufficient signe of the will of the Granter; or if it be avowed
by him, then is the Representer Soveraign, and falleth not under the
present question, which is onely of Bodies subordinate. No member
therefore is obliged to pay the debt so borrowed, but the Representative
himselfe: because he that lendeth it, being a stranger to the Letters,
and to the qualification of the Body, understandeth those onely for
his debtors, that are engaged; and seeing the Representer can ingage
himselfe, and none else, has him onely for Debtor; who must therefore
pay him, out of the common stock (if there be any), or (if there be
none) out of his own estate.

If he come into debt by Contract, or Mulct, the case is the same.




When It Is An Assembly, They Onely Are Liable That Have Assented

But when the Representative is an Assembly, and the debt to a stranger;
all they, and onely they are responsible for the debt, that gave their
votes to the borrowing of it, or to the Contract that made it due, or to
the fact for which the Mulct was imposed; because every one of those in
voting did engage himselfe for the payment: For he that is author of
the borrowing, is obliged to the payment, even of the whole debt, though
when payd by any one, he be discharged.




If The Debt Be To One Of The Assembly, The Body Onely Is Obliged

But if the debt be to one of the Assembly, the Assembly onely is obliged
to the payment, out of their common stock (if they have any:) For having
liberty of Vote, if he Vote the Mony, shall be borrowed, he Votes it
shall be payd; If he Vote it shall not be borrowed, or be absent, yet
because in lending, he voteth the borrowing, he contradicteth his former
Vote, and is obliged by the later, and becomes both borrower and lender,
and consequently cannot demand payment from any particular man, but
from the common Treasure onely; which fayling he hath no remedy, nor
complaint, but against himselfe, that being privy to the acts of
the Assembly, and their means to pay, and not being enforced, did
neverthelesse through his own folly lend his mony.




Protestation Against The Decrees Of Bodies Politique

Sometimes Lawful; But Against Soveraign Power Never It is manifest by
this, that in Bodies Politique subordinate, and subject to a Soveraign
Power, it is sometimes not onely lawfull, but expedient, for a
particular man to make open protestation against the decrees of the
Representative Assembly, and cause their dissent to be Registred, or to
take witnesse of it; because otherwise they may be obliged to pay debts
contracted, and be responsible for crimes committed by other men: But in
a Soveraign Assembly, that liberty is taken away, both because he that
protesteth there, denies their Soveraignty; and also because whatsoever
is commanded by the Soveraign Power, is as to the Subject (though not
so alwayes in the sight of God) justified by the Command; for of such
command every Subject is the Author.




Bodies Politique For Government Of A Province, Colony, Or Town

The variety of Bodies Politique, is almost infinite; for they are
not onely distinguished by the severall affaires, for which they are
constituted, wherein there is an unspeakable diversitie; but also by the
times, places, and numbers, subject to many limitations. And as to their
affaires, some are ordained for Government; As first, the Government
of a Province may be committed to an Assembly of men, wherein all
resolutions shall depend on the Votes of the major part; and then this
Assembly is a Body Politique, and their power limited by Commission.
This word Province signifies a charge, or care of businesse, which he
whose businesse it is, committeth to another man, to be administred for,
and under him; and therefore when in one Common-wealth there be divers
Countries, that have their Lawes distinct one from another, or are farre
distant in place, the Administration of the Government being committed
to divers persons, those Countries where the Soveraign is not resident,
but governs by Commission, are called Provinces. But of the government
of a Province, by an Assembly residing in the Province it selfe, there
be few examples. The Romans who had the Soveraignty of many Provinces;
yet governed them alwaies by Presidents, and Praetors; and not by
Assemblies, as they governed the City of Rome, and Territories adjacent.
In like manner, when there were Colonies sent from England, to Plant
Virginia, and Sommer-Ilands; though the government of them here, were
committed to Assemblies in London, yet did those Assemblies never
commit the Government under them to any Assembly there; but did to each
Plantation send one Governour; For though every man, where he can be
present by Nature, desires to participate of government; yet where
they cannot be present, they are by Nature also enclined, to commit the
Government of their common Interest rather to a Monarchicall, then a
Popular form of Government: which is also evident in those men that have
great private estates; who when they are unwilling to take the paines of
administring the businesse that belongs to them, choose rather to trust
one Servant, than a Assembly either of their friends or servants.
But howsoever it be in fact, yet we may suppose the Government of a
Province, or Colony committed to an Assembly: and when it is, that which
in this place I have to say, is this; that whatsoever debt is by that
Assembly contracted; or whatsoever unlawfull Act is decreed, is the Act
onely of those that assented, and not of any that dissented, or were
absent, for the reasons before alledged. Also that an Assembly residing
out of the bounds of that Colony whereof they have the government,
cannot execute any power over the persons, or goods of any of the
Colonie, to seize on them for debt, or other duty, in any place
without the Colony it selfe, as having no Jurisdiction, nor Authoritie
elsewhere, but are left to the remedie, which the Law of the place
alloweth them. And though the Assembly have right, to impose a Mulct
upon any of their members, that shall break the Lawes they make; yet
out of the Colonie it selfe, they have no right to execute the same.
And that which is said here, of the Rights of an Assembly, for the
government of a Province, or a Colony, is appliable also to an Assembly
for the Government of a Town, or University, or a College, or a Church,
or for any other Government over the persons of men.

And generally, in all Bodies Politique, if any particular member
conceive himself Injured by the Body it self, the Cognisance of his
cause belongeth to the Soveraign, and those the Soveraign hath ordained
for Judges in such causes, or shall ordaine for that particular cause;
and not to the Body it self. For the whole Body is in this case his
fellow subject, which in a Soveraign Assembly, is otherwise: for there,
if the Soveraign be not Judge, though in his own cause, there can be no
Judge at all.




Bodies Politique For Ordering Of Trade

In a Bodie Politique, for the well ordering of forraigne Traffique, the
most commodious Representative is an Assembly of all the members; that
is to say, such a one, as every one that adventureth his mony, may be
present at all the Deliberations, and Resolutions of the Body, if they
will themselves. For proof whereof, we are to consider the end, for
which men that are Merchants, and may buy and sell, export, and import
their Merchandise, according to their own discretions, doe neverthelesse
bind themselves up in one Corporation. It is true, there be few
Merchants, that with the Merchandise they buy at home, can fraight a
Ship, to export it; or with that they buy abroad, to bring it home; and
have therefore need to joyn together in one Society; where every man
may either participate of the gaine, according to the proportion of his
adventure; or take his own; and sell what he transports, or imports, at
such prices as he thinks fit. But this is no Body Politique, there being
no Common Representative to oblige them to any other Law, than that
which is common to all other subjects. The End of their Incorporating,
is to make their gaine the greater; which is done two wayes; by sole
buying, and sole selling, both at home, and abroad. So that to grant
to a Company of Merchants to be a Corporation, or Body Politique, is to
grant them a double Monopoly, whereof one is to be sole buyers; another
to be sole sellers. For when there is a Company incorporate for any
particular forraign Country, they only export the Commodities vendible
in that Country; which is sole buying at home, and sole selling abroad.
For at home there is but one buyer, and abroad but one that selleth:
both which is gainfull to the Merchant, because thereby they buy at home
at lower, and sell abroad at higher rates: And abroad there is but one
buyer of forraign Merchandise, and but one that sels them at home; both
which againe are gainfull to the adventurers.

Of this double Monopoly one part is disadvantageous to the people at
home, the other to forraigners. For at home by their sole exportation
they set what price they please on the husbandry and handy-works of
the people; and by the sole importation, what price they please on all
forraign commodities the people have need of; both which are ill for the
people. On the contrary, by the sole selling of the native commodities
abroad, and sole buying the forraign commodities upon the place,
they raise the price of those, and abate the price of these, to
the disadvantage of the forraigner: For where but one selleth, the
Merchandise is the dearer; and where but one buyeth the cheaper: Such
Corporations therefore are no other then Monopolies; though they would
be very profitable for a Common-wealth, if being bound up into one body
in forraigne Markets they were at liberty at home, every man to buy, and
sell at what price he could.

The end then of these Bodies of Merchants, being not a Common benefit
to the whole Body, (which have in this case no common stock, but what
is deducted out of the particular adventures, for building, buying,
victualling and manning of Ships,) but the particular gaine of
every adventurer, it is reason that every one be acquainted with the
employment of his own; that is, that every one be of the Assembly, that
shall have the power to order the same; and be acquainted with their
accounts. And therefore the Representative of such a Body must be
an Assembly, where every member of the Body may be present at the
consultations, if he will.

If a Body Politique of Merchants, contract a debt to a stranger by the
act of their Representative Assembly, every Member is lyable by himself
for the whole. For a stranger can take no notice of their private Lawes,
but considereth them as so many particular men, obliged every one to the
whole payment, till payment made by one dischargeth all the rest: But if
the debt be to one of the Company, the creditor is debter for the whole
to himself, and cannot therefore demand his debt, but only from the
common stock, if there be any.

If the Common-wealth impose a Tax upon the Body, it is understood to be
layd upon every member proportionably to his particular adventure in the
Company. For there is in this case no other common stock, but what is
made of their particular adventures.

If a Mulct be layd upon the Body for some unlawfull act, they only are
lyable by whose votes the act was decreed, or by whose assistance it was
executed; for in none of the rest is there any other crime but being
of the Body; which if a crime, (because the Body was ordeyned by the
authority of the Common-wealth,) is not his.

If one of the Members be indebted to the Body, he may be sued by the
Body; but his goods cannot be taken, nor his person imprisoned by the
authority of the Body; but only by Authority of the Common-wealth:
for if they can doe it by their own Authority, they can by their own
Authority give judgement that the debt is due, which is as much as to be
Judge in their own Cause.




A Bodie Politique For Counsel To Be Give To The Soveraign

These Bodies made for the government of Men, or of Traffique, be either
perpetuall, or for a time prescribed by writing. But there be Bodies
also whose times are limited, and that only by the nature of their
businesse. For example, if a Soveraign Monarch, or a Soveraign Assembly,
shall think fit to give command to the towns, and other severall parts
of their territory, to send to him their Deputies, to enforme him of the
condition, and necessities of the Subjects, or to advise with him for
the making of good Lawes, or for any other cause, as with one Person
representing the whole Country, such Deputies, having a place and time
of meeting assigned them, are there, and at that time, a Body Politique,
representing every Subject of that Dominion; but it is onely for such
matters as shall be propounded unto them by that Man, or Assembly, that
by the Soveraign Authority sent for them; and when it shall be declared
that nothing more shall be propounded, nor debated by them, the Body is
dissolved. For if they were the absolute Representative of the people,
then were it the Soveraign Assembly; and so there would be two Soveraign
Assemblies, or two Soveraigns, over the same people; which cannot
consist with their Peace. And therefore where there is once a
Soveraignty, there can be no absolute Representation of the people, but
by it. And for the limits of how farre such a Body shall represent the
whole People, they are set forth in the Writing by which they were sent
for. For the People cannot choose their Deputies to other intent, than
is in the Writing directed to them from their Soveraign expressed.




A Regular Private Body, Lawfull, As A Family

Private Bodies Regular, and Lawfull, are those that are constituted
without Letters, or other written Authority, saving the Lawes common
to all other Subjects. And because they be united in one Person
Representative, they are held for Regular; such as are all Families, in
which the Father, or Master ordereth the whole Family. For he obligeth
his Children, and Servants, as farre as the Law permitteth, though not
further, because none of them are bound to obedience in those actions,
which the Law hath forbidden to be done. In all other actions, during
the time they are under domestique government, they are subject to their
Fathers, and Masters, as to their immediate Soveraigns. For the Father,
and Master being before the Institution of Common-wealth, absolute
Soveraigns in their own Families, they lose afterward no more of their
Authority, than the Law of the Common-wealth taketh from them.




Private Bodies Regular, But Unlawfull

Private Bodies Regular, but Unlawfull, are those that unite themselves
into one person Representative, without any publique Authority at all;
such as are the Corporations of Beggars, Theeves and Gipsies, the better
to order their trade of begging, and stealing; and the Corporations of
men, that by Authority from any forraign Person, unite themselves in
anothers Dominion, for easier propagation of Doctrines, and for making a
party, against the Power of the Common-wealth.




Systemes Irregular, Such As Are Private Leagues

Irregular Systemes, in their nature, but Leagues, or sometimes meer
concourse of people, without union to any particular designe, not by
obligation of one to another, but proceeding onely from a similitude of
wills and inclinations, become Lawfull, or Unlawfull, according to the
lawfulnesse, or unlawfulnesse of every particular mans design therein:
And his designe is to be understood by the occasion.

The Leagues of Subjects, (because Leagues are commonly made for mutuall
defence,) are in a Common-wealth (which is no more than a League of
all the Subjects together) for the most part unnecessary, and savour of
unlawfull designe; and are for that cause Unlawfull, and go commonly by
the name of factions, or Conspiracies. For a League being a connexion of
men by Covenants, if there be no power given to any one Man or Assembly,
(as in the condition of meer Nature) to compell them to performance,
is so long onely valid, as there ariseth no just cause of distrust: and
therefore Leagues between Common-wealths, over whom there is no humane
Power established, to keep them all in awe, are not onely lawfull, but
also profitable for the time they last. But Leagues of the Subjects of
one and the same Common-wealth, where every one may obtain his right
by means of the Soveraign Power, are unnecessary to the maintaining of
Peace and Justice, and (in case the designe of them be evill, or Unknown
to the Common-wealth) unlawfull. For all uniting of strength by private
men, is, if for evill intent, unjust; if for intent unknown, dangerous
to the Publique, and unjustly concealed.




Secret Cabals

If the Soveraign Power be in a great Assembly, and a number of men,
part of the Assembly, without authority, consult a part, to contrive
the guidance of the rest; This is a Faction, or Conspiracy unlawfull,
as being a fraudulent seducing of the Assembly for their particular
interest. But if he, whose private interest is to be debated, and
judged in the Assembly, make as many friends as he can; in him it is
no Injustice; because in this case he is no part of the Assembly. And
though he hire such friends with mony, (unlesse there be an expresse Law
against it,) yet it is not Injustice. For sometimes, (as mens manners
are,) Justice cannot be had without mony; and every man may think his
own cause just, till it be heard, and judged.




Feuds Of Private Families

In all Common-wealths, if a private man entertain more servants, than
the government of his estate, and lawfull employment he has for them
requires, it is Faction, and unlawfull. For having the protection of the
Common-wealth, he needeth not the defence of private force. And whereas
in Nations not throughly civilized, severall numerous Families have
lived in continuall hostility, and invaded one another with private
force; yet it is evident enough, that they have done unjustly; or else
that they had no Common-wealth.




Factions For Government

And as Factions for Kindred, so also Factions for Government of
Religion, as of Papists, Protestants, &c. or of State, as Patricians,
and Plebeians of old time in Rome, and of Aristocraticalls and
Democraticalls of old time in Greece, are unjust, as being contrary to
the peace and safety of the people, and a taking of the Sword out of the
hand of the Soveraign.

Concourse of people, is an Irregular Systeme, the lawfulnesse, or
unlawfulnesse, whereof dependeth on the occasion, and on the number of
them that are assembled. If the occasion be lawfull, and manifest, the
Concourse is lawfull; as the usuall meeting of men at Church, or at a
publique Shew, in usuall numbers: for if the numbers be extraordinarily
great, the occasion is not evident; and consequently he that cannot
render a particular and good account of his being amongst them, is to
be judged conscious of an unlawfull, and tumultuous designe. It may be
lawfull for a thousand men, to joyn in a Petition to be delivered to a
Judge, or Magistrate; yet if a thousand men come to present it, it is
a tumultuous Assembly; because there needs but one or two for that
purpose. But in such cases as these, it is not a set number that makes
the Assembly Unlawfull, but such a number, as the present Officers are
not able to suppresse, and bring to Justice.

When an unusuall number of men, assemble against a man whom they accuse;
the Assembly is an Unlawfull tumult; because they may deliver their
accusation to the Magistrate by a few, or by one man. Such was the case
of St. Paul at Ephesus; where Demetrius, and a great number of other
men, brought two of Pauls companions before the Magistrate, saying with
one Voyce, "Great is Diana of the Ephesians;" which was their way of
demanding Justice against them for teaching the people such doctrine,
as was against their Religion, and Trade. The occasion here, considering
the Lawes of that People, was just; yet was their Assembly Judged
Unlawfull, and the Magistrate reprehended them for it, in these
words,(Acts 19. 40) "If Demetrius and the other work-men can accuse any
man, of any thing, there be Pleas, and Deputies, let them accuse one
another. And if you have any other thing to demand, your case may
be judged in an Assembly Lawfully called. For we are in danger to be
accused for this dayes sedition, because, there is no cause by which any
man can render any reason of this Concourse of People." Where he calleth
an Assembly, whereof men can give no just account, a Sedition, and such
as they could not answer for. And this is all I shall say concerning
Systemes, and Assemblyes of People, which may be compared (as I said,)
to the Similar parts of mans Body; such as be Lawfull, to the Muscles;
such as are Unlawfull, to Wens, Biles, and Apostemes, engendred by the
unnaturall conflux of evill humours.



CHAPTER XXIII. OF THE PUBLIQUE MINISTERS OF SOVERAIGN POWER


In the last Chapter I have spoken of the Similar parts of a
Common-wealth; In this I shall speak of the parts Organicall, which are
Publique Ministers.




Publique Minister Who

A PUBLIQUE MINISTER, is he, that by the Soveraign, (whether a Monarch,
or an Assembly,) is employed in any affaires, with Authority to
represent in that employment, the Person of the Common-wealth. And
whereas every man, or assembly that hath Soveraignty, representeth
two Persons, or (as the more common phrase is) has two Capacities, one
Naturall, and another Politique, (as a Monarch, hath the person not
onely of the Common-wealth, but also of a man; and a Soveraign Assembly
hath the Person not onely of the Common-wealth, but also of the
Assembly); they that be servants to them in their naturall Capacity,
are not Publique Ministers; but those onely that serve them in the
Administration of the Publique businesse. And therefore neither Ushers,
nor Sergeants, nor other Officers that waite on the Assembly, for
no other purpose, but for the commodity of the men assembled, in an
Aristocracy, or Democracy; nor Stewards, Chamberlains, Cofferers, or any
other Officers of the houshold of a Monarch, are Publique Ministers in a
Monarchy.




Ministers For The Generall Administration

Of Publique Ministers, some have charge committed to them of a general
Administration, either of the whole Dominion, or of a part thereof.
Of the whole, as to a Protector, or Regent, may bee committed by
the Predecessor of an Infant King, during his minority, the whole
Administration of his Kingdome. In which case, every Subject is so far
obliged to obedience, as the Ordinances he shall make, and the commands
he shall give be in the Kings name, and not inconsistent with his
Soveraigne Power. Of a Part, or Province; as when either a Monarch, or
a Soveraign Assembly, shall give the generall charge thereof to a
Governour, Lieutenant, Praefect, or Vice-Roy: And in this case also,
every one of that Province, is obliged to all he shall doe in the name
of the Soveraign, and that not incompatible with the Soveraigns Right.
For such Protectors, Vice-Roys, and Governours, have no other right, but
what depends on the Soveraigns Will; and no Commission that can be given
them, can be interpreted for a Declaration of the will to transferre the
Soveraignty, without expresse and perspicuous words to that purpose. And
this kind of Publique Ministers resembleth the Nerves, and Tendons that
move the severall limbs of a body naturall.




For Speciall Administration, As For Oeconomy

Others have speciall Administration; that is to say, charges of some
speciall businesse, either at home, or abroad: As at home, First, for
the Oeconomy of a Common-wealth, They that have Authority concerning the
Treasure, as Tributes, Impositions, Rents, Fines, or whatsoever publique
revenue, to collect, receive, issue, or take the Accounts thereof,
are Publique Ministers: Ministers, because they serve the Person
Representative, and can doe nothing against his Command, nor without his
Authority: Publique, because they serve him in his Politicall Capacity.

Secondly, they that have Authority concerning the Militia; to have the
custody of Armes, Forts, Ports; to Levy, Pay, or Conduct Souldiers; or
to provide for any necessary thing for the use of war, either by Land or
Sea, are publique Ministers. But a Souldier without Command, though he
fight for the Common-wealth, does not therefore represent the Person of
it; because there is none to represent it to. For every one that hath
command, represents it to them only whom he commandeth.




For Instruction Of The People

They also that have authority to teach, or to enable others to teach
the people their duty to the Soveraign Power, and instruct them in the
knowledge of what is just, and unjust, thereby to render them more apt
to live in godlinesse, and in peace among themselves, and resist the
publique enemy, are Publique Ministers: Ministers, in that they doe it
not by their own Authority, but by anothers; and Publique, because they
doe it (or should doe it) by no Authority, but that of the Soveraign.
The Monarch, or the Soveraign Assembly only hath immediate Authority
from God, to teach and instruct the people; and no man but the
Soveraign, receiveth his power Dei Gratia simply; that is to say, from
the favour of none but God: All other, receive theirs from the favour
and providence of God, and their Soveraigns; as in a Monarchy Dei Gratia
& Regis; or Dei Providentia & Voluntate Regis.




For Judicature

They also to whom Jurisdiction is given, are Publique Ministers. For in
their Seats of Justice they represent the person of the Soveraign; and
their Sentence, is his Sentence; For (as hath been before declared) all
Judicature is essentially annexed to the Soveraignty; and therefore all
other Judges are but Ministers of him, or them that have the Soveraign
Power. And as Controversies are of two sorts, namely of Fact, and of
Law; so are judgements, some of Fact, some of Law: And consequently in
the same controversie, there may be two Judges, one of Fact, another of
Law.

And in both these controversies, there may arise a controversie between
the party Judged, and the Judge; which because they be both Subjects to
the Soveraign, ought in Equity to be Judged by men agreed on by consent
of both; for no man can be Judge in his own cause. But the Soveraign
is already agreed on for Judge by them both, and is therefore either to
heare the Cause, and determine it himself, or appoint for Judge such as
they shall both agree on. And this agreement is then understood to be
made between them divers wayes; as first, if the Defendant be allowed
to except against such of his Judges, whose interest maketh him suspect
them, (for as to the Complaynant he hath already chosen his own Judge,)
those which he excepteth not against, are Judges he himself agrees on.
Secondly, if he appeale to any other Judge, he can appeale no further;
for his appeale is his choice. Thirdly, if he appeale to the Soveraign
himself, and he by himself, or by Delegates which the parties shall
agree on, give Sentence; that Sentence is finall: for the Defendant is
Judged by his own Judges, that is to say, by himself.

These properties of just and rationall Judicature considered, I cannot
forbeare to observe the excellent constitution of the Courts of Justice,
established both for Common, and also for Publique Pleas in England. By
Common Pleas, I meane those, where both the Complaynant and Defendant
are Subjects: and by Publique, (which are also called Pleas of the
Crown) those, where the Complaynant is the Soveraign. For whereas there
were two orders of men, whereof one was Lords, the other Commons; The
Lords had this Priviledge, to have for Judges in all Capitall crimes,
none but Lords; and of them, as many as would be present; which being
ever acknowledged as a Priviledge of favour, their Judges were none but
such as they had themselves desired. And in all controversies, every
Subject (as also in civill controversies the Lords) had for Judges, men
of the Country where the matter in controversie lay; against which he
might make his exceptions, till at last Twelve men without exception
being agreed on, they were Judged by those twelve. So that having
his own Judges, there could be nothing alledged by the party, why the
sentence should not be finall, These publique persons, with Authority
from the Soveraign Power, either to Instruct, or Judge the people,
are such members of the Common-wealth, as may fitly be compared to the
organs of Voice in a Body naturall.




For Execution

Publique Ministers are also all those, that have Authority from the
Soveraign, to procure the Execution of Judgements given; to publish the
Soveraigns Commands; to suppresse Tumults; to apprehend, and imprison
Malefactors; and other acts tending to the conservation of the
Peace. For every act they doe by such Authority, is the act of the
Common-wealth; and their service, answerable to that of the Hands, in a
Bodie naturall.

Publique Ministers abroad, are those that represent the Person of their
own Soveraign, to forraign States. Such are Ambassadors, Messengers,
Agents, and Heralds, sent by publique Authoritie, and on publique
Businesse.

But such as are sent by Authoritie only of some private partie of a
troubled State, though they be received, are neither Publique, nor
Private Ministers of the Common-wealth; because none of their actions
have the Common-wealth for Author. Likewise, an Ambassador sent from a
Prince, to congratulate, condole, or to assist at a solemnity, though
Authority be Publique; yet because the businesse is Private, and
belonging to him in his naturall capacity; is a Private person. Also if
a man be sent into another Country, secretly to explore their counsels,
and strength; though both the Authority, and the Businesse be Publique;
yet because there is none to take notice of any Person in him, but
his own; he is but a Private Minister; but yet a Minister of the
Common-wealth; and may be compared to an Eye in the Body naturall. And
those that are appointed to receive the Petitions or other informations
of the People, and are as it were the publique Eare, are Publique
Ministers, and represent their Soveraign in that office.




Counsellers Without Other Employment Then To Advise Are Not Publique
Ministers

Neither a Counsellor, nor a Councell of State, if we consider it with
no Authority of Judicature or Command, but only of giving Advice to
the Soveraign when it is required, or of offering it when it is not
required, is a Publique Person. For the Advice is addressed to the
Soveraign only, whose person cannot in his own presence, be represented
to him, by another. But a Body of Counsellors, are never without some
other Authority, either of Judicature, or of immediate Administration:
As in a Monarchy, they represent the Monarch, in delivering his Commands
to the Publique Ministers: In a Democracy, the Councell, or Senate
propounds the Result of their deliberations to the people, as a
Councell; but when they appoint Judges, or heare Causes, or give
Audience to Ambassadors, it is in the quality of a Minister of the
People: And in an Aristocracy the Councell of State is the Soveraign
Assembly it self; and gives counsell to none but themselves.



CHAPTER XXIV. OF THE NUTRITION, AND PROCREATION OF A COMMON-WEALTH



The Nourishment Of A Common-wealth Consisteth In The Commodities

Of Sea And Land

The NUTRITION of a Common-wealth consisteth, in the Plenty, and
Distribution of Materials conducing to Life: In Concoction, or
Preparation; and (when concocted) in the Conveyance of it, by convenient
conduits, to the Publique use.

As for the Plenty of Matter, it is a thing limited by Nature, to those
commodities, which from (the two breasts of our common Mother) Land,
and Sea, God usually either freely giveth, or for labour selleth to
man-kind.

For the Matter of this Nutriment, consisting in Animals, Vegetals, and
Minerals, God hath freely layd them before us, in or neer to the face of
the Earth; so as there needeth no more but the labour, and industry
of receiving them. Insomuch as Plenty dependeth (next to Gods favour)
meerly on the labour and industry of men.

This Matter, commonly called Commodities, is partly Native, and partly
Forraign: Native, that which is to be had within the Territory of
the Common-wealth; Forraign, that which is imported from without. And
because there is no Territory under the Dominion of one Common-wealth,
(except it be of very vast extent,) that produceth all things needfull
for the maintenance, and motion of the whole Body; and few that produce
not something more than necessary; the superfluous commodities to be had
within, become no more superfluous, but supply these wants at home, by
importation of that which may be had abroad, either by Exchange, or
by just Warre, or by Labour: for a mans Labour also, is a commodity
exchangeable for benefit, as well as any other thing: And there have
been Common-wealths that having no more Territory, than hath served
them for habitation, have neverthelesse, not onely maintained, but also
encreased their Power, partly by the labour of trading from one place to
another, and partly by selling the Manifactures, whereof the Materials
were brought in from other places.




And The Right Of Distribution Of Them

The Distribution of the Materials of this Nourishment, is the
constitution of Mine, and Thine, and His, that is to say, in one word
Propriety; and belongeth in all kinds of Common-wealth to the Soveraign
Power. For where there is no Common-wealth, there is, (as hath been
already shewn) a perpetuall warre of every man against his neighbour;
And therefore every thing is his that getteth it, and keepeth it by
force; which is neither Propriety nor Community; but Uncertainty. Which
is so evident, that even Cicero, (a passionate defender of Liberty,) in
a publique pleading, attributeth all Propriety to the Law Civil, "Let
the Civill Law," saith he, "be once abandoned, or but negligently
guarded, (not to say oppressed,) and there is nothing, that any man can
be sure to receive from his Ancestor, or leave to his Children." And
again; "Take away the Civill Law, and no man knows what is his own, and
what another mans." Seeing therefore the Introduction of Propriety is
an effect of Common-wealth; which can do nothing but by the Person that
Represents it, it is the act onely of the Soveraign; and consisteth in
the Lawes, which none can make that have not the Soveraign Power. And
this they well knew of old, who called that Nomos, (that is to say,
Distribution,) which we call Law; and defined Justice, by distributing
to every man his own.




All Private Estates Of Land Proceed Originally From The Arbitrary
Distribution Of The Soveraign

In this Distribution, the First Law, is for Division of the Land it
selfe: wherein the Soveraign assigneth to every man a portion, according
as he, and not according as any Subject, or any number of them, shall
judge agreeable to Equity, and the Common Good. The Children of Israel,
were a Common-wealth in the Wildernesse; but wanted the commodities
of the Earth, till they were masters of the Land of Promise; which
afterward was divided amongst them, not by their own discretion, but
by the discretion of Eleazar the Priest, and Joshua their Generall: who
when there were twelve Tribes, making them thirteen by subdivision of
the Tribe of Joseph; made neverthelesse but twelve portions of the Land;
and ordained for the Tribe of Levi no land; but assigned them the Tenth
part of the whole fruits; which division was therefore Arbitrary. And
though a People comming into possession of a land by warre, do not
alwaies exterminate the antient Inhabitants, (as did the Jewes,) but
leave to many, or most, or all of them their Estates; yet it is manifest
they hold them afterwards, as of the Victors distribution; as the people
of England held all theirs of William the Conquerour.




Propriety Of A Subject Excludes Not The Dominion Of The Soveraign, But
Onely Of Another Subject

From whence we may collect, that the Propriety which a subject hath in
his lands, consisteth in a right to exclude all other subjects from the
use of them; and not to exclude their Soveraign, be it an Assembly, or
a Monarch. For seeing the Soveraign, that is to say, the Common-wealth
(whose Person he representeth,) is understood to do nothing but in order
to the common Peace and Security, this Distribution of lands, is to be
understood as done in order to the same: And consequently, whatsoever
Distribution he shall make in prejudice thereof, is contrary to the
will of every subject, that committed his Peace, and safety to his
discretion, and conscience; and therefore by the will of every one of
them, is to be reputed voyd. It is true, that a Soveraign Monarch, or
the greater part of a Soveraign Assembly, may ordain the doing of many
things in pursuit of their Passions, contrary to their own consciences,
which is a breach of trust, and of the Law of Nature; but this is not
enough to authorise any subject, either to make warre upon, or so much
as to accuse of Injustice, or any way to speak evill of their Soveraign;
because they have authorised all his actions, and in bestowing the
Soveraign Power, made them their own. But in what cases the Commands
of Soveraigns are contrary to Equity, and the Law of Nature, is to be
considered hereafter in another place.




The Publique Is Not To Be Dieted

In the Distribution of land, the Common-wealth it selfe, may be
conceived to have a portion, and possesse, and improve the same by
their Representative; and that such portion may be made sufficient, to
susteine the whole expence to the common Peace, and defence necessarily
required: Which were very true, if there could be any Representative
conceived free from humane passions, and infirmities. But the nature
of men being as it is, the setting forth of Publique Land, or of any
certaine Revenue for the Common-wealth, is in vaine; and tendeth to the
dissolution of Government, and to the condition of meere Nature, and
War, assoon as ever the Soveraign Power falleth into the hands of a
Monarch, or of an Assembly, that are either too negligent of mony, or
too hazardous in engaging the publique stock, into a long, or costly
war. Common-wealths can endure no Diet: For seeing their expence is
not limited by their own appetite, but by externall Accidents, and the
appetites of their neighbours, the Publique Riches cannot be limited by
other limits, than those which the emergent occasions shall require. And
whereas in England, there were by the Conquerour, divers Lands
reserved to his own use, (besides Forrests, and Chases, either for his
recreation, or for preservation of Woods,) and divers services reserved
on the Land he gave his Subjects; yet it seems they were not reserved
for his Maintenance in his Publique, but in his Naturall capacity: For
he, and his Successors did for all that, lay Arbitrary Taxes on all
Subjects land, when they judged it necessary. Or if those publique
Lands, and Services, were ordained as a sufficient maintenance of the
Common-wealth, it was contrary to the scope of the Institution; being
(as it appeared by those ensuing Taxes) insufficient, and (as it
appeares by the late Revenue of the Crown) Subject to Alienation,
and Diminution. It is therefore in vaine, to assign a portion to the
Common-wealth; which may sell, or give it away; and does sell, and give
it away when tis done by their Representative.




The Places And Matter Of Traffique Depend, As Their Distribution, On
The Soveraign

As the Distribution of Lands at home; so also to assigne in what places,
and for what commodities, the Subject shall traffique abroad, belongeth
to the Soveraign. For if it did belong to private persons to use their
own discretion therein, some of them would bee drawn for gaine, both
to furnish the enemy with means to hurt the Common-wealth, and hurt it
themselves, by importing such things, as pleasing mens appetites, be
neverthelesse noxious, or at least unprofitable to them. And therefore
it belongeth to the Common-wealth, (that is, to the Soveraign only,)
to approve, or disapprove both of the places, and matter of forraign
Traffique.




The Laws Of Transferring Property Belong Also To The Soveraign

Further, seeing it is not enough to the Sustentation of a Common-wealth,
that every man have a propriety in a portion of Land, or in some few
commodities, or a naturall property in some usefull art, and there is no
art in the world, but is necessary either for the being, or well being
almost of every particular man; it is necessary, that men distribute
that which they can spare, and transferre their propriety therein,
mutually one to another, by exchange, and mutuall contract. And
therefore it belongeth to the Common-wealth, (that is to say, to the
Soveraign,) to appoint in what manner, all kinds of contract between
Subjects, (as buying, selling, exchanging, borrowing, lending, letting,
and taking to hire,) are to bee made; and by what words, and signes they
shall be understood for valid. And for the Matter, and Distribution of
the Nourishment, to the severall Members of the Common-wealth, thus much
(considering the modell of the whole worke) is sufficient.




Mony The Bloud Of A Common-wealth

By Concoction, I understand the reducing of all commodities, which are
not presently consumed, but reserved for Nourishment in time to come, to
some thing of equal value, and withall so portably, as not to hinder
the motion of men from place to place; to the end a man may have in
what place soever, such Nourishment as the place affordeth. And this is
nothing else but Gold, and Silver, and Mony. For Gold and Silver, being
(as it happens) almost in all Countries of the world highly valued, is a
commodious measure for the value of all things else between Nations; and
Mony (of what matter soever coyned by the Soveraign of a Common-wealth,)
is a sufficient measure of the value of all things else, between the
Subjects of that Common-wealth. By the means of which measures, all
commodities, Moveable, and Immoveable, are made to accompany a man, to
all places of his resort, within and without the place of his
ordinary residence; and the same passeth from Man to Man, within the
Common-wealth; and goes round about, Nourishing (as it passeth)
every part thereof; In so much as this Concoction, is as it were the
Sanguification of the Common-wealth: For naturall Bloud is in like
manner made of the fruits of the Earth; and circulating, nourisheth by
the way, every Member of the Body of Man.

And because Silver and Gold, have their value from the matter it self;
they have first this priviledge, that the value of them cannot be
altered by the power of one, nor of a few Common-wealths; as being a
common measure of the commodities of all places. But base Mony, may
easily be enhanced, or abased. Secondly, they have the priviledge to
make Common-wealths, move, and stretch out their armes, when need is,
into forraign Countries; and supply, not only private Subjects that
travell, but also whole Armies with provision. But that Coyne, which is
not considerable for the Matter, but for the Stamp of the place, being
unable to endure change of ayr, hath its effect at home only; where
also it is subject to the change of Laws, and thereby to have the value
diminished, to the prejudice many times of those that have it.




The Conduits And Way Of Mony To The Publique Use

The Conduits, and Wayes by which it is conveyed to the Publique use, are
of two sorts; One, that Conveyeth it to the Publique Coffers; The other,
that Issueth the same out againe for publique payments. Of the first
sort, are Collectors, Receivers, and Treasurers; of the second are the
Treasurers againe, and the Officers appointed for payment of severall
publique or private Ministers. And in this also, the Artificiall Man
maintains his resemblance with the Naturall; whose Veins receiving the
Bloud from the severall Parts of the Body, carry it to the Heart; where
being made Vitall, the Heart by the Arteries sends it out again, to
enliven, and enable for motion all the Members of the same.




The Children Of A Common-wealth Colonies

The Procreation, or Children of a Common-wealth, are those we call
Plantations, or Colonies; which are numbers of men sent out from the
Common-wealth, under a Conductor, or Governour, to inhabit a Forraign
Country, either formerly voyd of Inhabitants, or made voyd then, by
warre. And when a Colony is setled, they are either a Common-wealth of
themselves, discharged of their subjection to their Soveraign that sent
them, (as hath been done by many Common-wealths of antient time,) in
which case the Common-wealth from which they went was called their
Metropolis, or Mother, and requires no more of them, then Fathers
require of the Children, whom they emancipate, and make free from their
domestique government, which is Honour, and Friendship; or else they
remain united to their Metropolis, as were the Colonies of the people of
Rome; and then they are no Common-wealths themselves, but Provinces, and
parts of the Common-wealth that sent them. So that the Right of Colonies
(saving Honour, and League with their Metropolis,) dependeth wholly on
their Licence, or Letters, by which their Soveraign authorised them to
Plant.



CHAPTER XXV. OF COUNSELL




Counsell What

How fallacious it is to judge of the nature of things, by the ordinary
and inconstant use of words, appeareth in nothing more, than in the
confusion of Counsels, and Commands, arising from the Imperative manner
of speaking in them both, and in many other occasions besides. For the
words "Doe this," are the words not onely of him that Commandeth; but
also of him that giveth Counsell; and of him that Exhorteth; and yet
there are but few, that see not, that these are very different things;
or that cannot distinguish between them, when they perceive who it
is that speaketh, and to whom the Speech is directed, and upon what
occasion. But finding those phrases in mens writings, and being not
able, or not willing to enter into a consideration of the circumstances,
they mistake sometimes the Precepts of Counsellours, for the Precepts
of them that command; and sometimes the contrary; according as it best
agreeth with the conclusions they would inferre, or the actions
they approve. To avoyd which mistakes, and render to those termes
of Commanding, Counselling, and Exhorting, their proper and distinct
significations, I define them thus.




Differences Between Command And Counsell

COMMAND is, where a man saith, "Doe this," or "Doe this not," without
expecting other reason than the Will of him that sayes it. From this it
followeth manifestly, that he that Commandeth, pretendeth thereby his
own Benefit: For the reason of his Command is his own Will onely, and
the proper object of every mans Will, is some Good to himselfe.

COUNSELL, is where a man saith, "Doe" or "Doe not this," and deduceth
his own reasons from the benefit that arriveth by it to him to whom he
saith it. And from this it is evident, that he that giveth Counsell,
pretendeth onely (whatsoever he intendeth) the good of him, to whom he
giveth it.

Therefore between Counsell and Command, one great difference is, that
Command is directed to a mans own benefit; and Counsell to the benefit
of another man. And from this ariseth another difference, that a man
may be obliged to do what he is Commanded; as when he hath covenanted
to obey: But he cannot be obliged to do as he is Counselled, because the
hurt of not following it, is his own; or if he should covenant to follow
it, then is the Counsell turned into the nature of a Command. A third
difference between them is, that no man can pretend a right to be of
another mans Counsell; because he is not to pretend benefit by it to
himselfe; but to demand right to Counsell another, argues a will to know
his designes, or to gain some other Good to himselfe; which (as I said
before) is of every mans will the proper object.

This also is incident to the nature of Counsell; that whatsoever it be,
he that asketh it, cannot in equity accuse, or punish it: For to ask
Counsell of another, is to permit him to give such Counsell as he shall
think best; And consequently, he that giveth counsell to his Soveraign,
(whether a Monarch, or an Assembly) when he asketh it, cannot in equity
be punished for it, whether the same be conformable to the opinion of
the most, or not, so it be to the Proposition in debate. For if the
sense of the Assembly can be taken notice of, before the Debate be
ended, they should neither ask, nor take any further Counsell; For the
Sense of the Assembly, is the Resolution of the Debate, and End of all
Deliberation. And generally he that demandeth Counsell, is Author of it;
and therefore cannot punish it; and what the Soveraign cannot, no man
else can. But if one Subject giveth Counsell to another, to do any
thing contrary to the Lawes, whether that Counsell proceed from
evill intention, or from ignorance onely, it is punishable by the
Common-wealth; because ignorance of the Law, is no good excuse, where
every man is bound to take notice of the Lawes to which he is subject.




Exhortation And Dehortation What

EXHORTATION, and DEHORTATION, is Counsell, accompanied with signes in
him that giveth it, of vehement desire to have it followed; or to say it
more briefly, Counsell Vehemently Pressed. For he that Exhorteth, doth
not deduce the consequences of what he adviseth to be done, and tye
himselfe therein to the rigour of true reasoning; but encourages him he
Counselleth, to Action: As he that Dehorteth, deterreth him from it. And
therefore they have in their speeches, a regard to the common Passions,
and opinions of men, in deducing their reasons; and make use of
Similitudes, Metaphors, Examples, and other tooles of Oratory, to
perswade their Hearers of the Utility, Honour, or Justice of following
their advise.

From whence may be inferred, First, that Exhortation and Dehortation,
is directed to the Good of him that giveth the Counsell, not of him that
asketh it, which is contrary to the duty of a Counsellour; who (by the
definition of Counsell) ought to regard, not his own benefits, but his
whom he adviseth. And that he directeth his Counsell to his own
benefit, is manifest enough, by the long and vehement urging, or by
the artificial giving thereof; which being not required of him, and
consequently proceeding from his own occasions, is directed principally
to his own benefit, and but accidentarily to the good of him that is
Counselled, or not at all.

Secondly, that the use of Exhortation and Dehortation lyeth onely, where
a man is to speak to a Multitude; because when the Speech is addressed
to one, he may interrupt him, and examine his reasons more rigorously,
than can be done in a Multitude; which are too many to enter into
Dispute, and Dialogue with him that speaketh indifferently to them
all at once. Thirdly, that they that Exhort and Dehort, where they are
required to give Counsell, are corrupt Counsellours, and as it were
bribed by their own interest. For though the Counsell they give be never
so good; yet he that gives it, is no more a good Counsellour, than he
that giveth a Just Sentence for a reward, is a just Judge. But where a
man may lawfully Command, as a Father in his Family, or a Leader in an
Army, his Exhortations and Dehortations, are not onely lawfull, but
also necessary, and laudable: But then they are no more Counsells, but
Commands; which when they are for Execution of soure labour; sometimes
necessity, and alwayes humanity requireth to be sweetned in the
delivery, by encouragement, and in the tune and phrase of Counsell,
rather then in harsher language of Command.

Examples of the difference between Command and Counsell, we may take
from the formes of Speech that expresse them in Holy Scripture. "Have no
other Gods but me; Make to thy selfe no graven Image; Take not Gods name
in vain; Sanctifie the Sabbath; Honour thy Parents; Kill not; Steale
not," &c. are Commands; because the reason for which we are to obey
them, is drawn from the will of God our King, whom we are obliged to
obey. But these words, "Sell all thou hast; give it to the poore; and
follow me," are Counsell; because the reason for which we are to do
so, is drawn from our own benefit; which is this, that we shall have
"Treasure in Heaven." These words, "Go into the village over against
you, and you shall find an Asse tyed, and her Colt; loose her, and bring
her to me," are a Command: for the reason of their fact is drawn from
the will of their Master: but these words, "Repent, and be Baptized in
the Name of Jesus," are Counsell; because the reason why we should so
do, tendeth not to any benefit of God Almighty, who shall still be King
in what manner soever we rebell; but of our selves, who have no other
means of avoyding the punishment hanging over us for our sins.




Differences Of Fit And Unfit Counsellours

As the difference of Counsell from Command, hath been now deduced from
the nature of Counsell, consisting in a deducing of the benefit, or
hurt that may arise to him that is to be Counselled, by the necessary
or probable consequences of the action he propoundeth; so may also the
differences between apt, and inept counsellours be derived from the
same. For Experience, being but Memory of the consequences of like
actions formerly observed, and Counsell but the Speech whereby that
experience is made known to another; the Vertues, and Defects of
Counsell, are the same with the Vertues, and Defects Intellectuall:
And to the Person of a Common-wealth, his Counsellours serve him in the
place of Memory, and Mentall Discourse. But with this resemblance of the
Common-wealth, to a naturall man, there is one dissimilitude joyned,
of great importance; which is, that a naturall man receiveth his
experience, from the naturall objects of sense, which work upon him
without passion, or interest of their own; whereas they that give
Counsell to the Representative person of a Common-wealth, may have,
and have often their particular ends, and passions, that render their
Counsells alwayes suspected, and many times unfaithfull. And therefore
we may set down for the first condition of a good Counsellour, That His
Ends, And Interest, Be Not Inconsistent With The Ends And Interest Of
Him He Counselleth.

Secondly, Because the office of a Counsellour, when an action comes
into deliberation, is to make manifest the consequences of it, in such
manner, as he that is Counselled may be truly and evidently informed; he
ought to propound his advise, in such forme of speech, as may make
the truth most evidently appear; that is to say, with as firme
ratiocination, as significant and proper language, and as briefly, as
the evidence will permit. And therefore Rash, And Unevident Inferences;
(such as are fetched onely from Examples, or authority of Books, and are
not arguments of what is good, or evill, but witnesses of fact, or
of opinion,) Obscure, Confused, And Ambiguous Expressions, Also All
Metaphoricall Speeches, Tending To The Stirring Up Of Passion, (because
such reasoning, and such expressions, are usefull onely to deceive, or
to lead him we Counsell towards other ends than his own) Are Repugnant
To The Office Of A Counsellour.

Thirdly, Because the Ability of Counselling proceedeth from Experience,
and long study; and no man is presumed to have experience in all those
things that to the Administration of a great Common-wealth are necessary
to be known, No Man Is Presumed To Be A Good Counsellour, But In Such
Businesse, As He Hath Not Onely Been Much Versed In, But Hath Also
Much Meditated On, And Considered. For seeing the businesse of a
Common-wealth is this, to preserve the people at home, and defend them
against forraign Invasion, we shall find, it requires great knowledge
of the disposition of Man-kind, of the Rights of Government, and of the
nature of Equity, Law, Justice, and Honour, not to be attained without
study; And of the Strength, Commodities, Places, both of their own
Country, and their Neighbours; as also of the inclinations, and designes
of all Nations that may any way annoy them. And this is not attained to,
without much experience. Of which things, not onely the whole summe, but
every one of the particulars requires the age, and observation of a man
in years, and of more than ordinary study. The wit required for Counsel,
as I have said before is Judgement. And the differences of men in that
point come from different education, of some to one kind of study, or
businesse, and of others to another. When for the doing of any thing,
there be Infallible rules, (as in Engines, and Edifices, the rules of
Geometry,) all the experience of the world cannot equall his Counsell,
that has learnt, or found out the Rule. And when there is no such Rule,
he that hath most experience in that particular kind of businesse, has
therein the best Judgement, and is the best Counsellour.

Fourthly, to be able to give Counsell to a Common-wealth, in a businesse
that hath reference to another Common-wealth, It Is Necessary To Be
Acquainted With The Intelligences, And Letters That Come From Thence,
And With All The Records Of Treaties, And Other Transactions Of State
Between Them; which none can doe, but such as the Representative
shall think fit. By which we may see, that they who are not called to
Counsell, can have no good Counsell in such cases to obtrude.

Fifthly, Supposing the number of Counsellors equall, a man is better
Counselled by hearing them apart, then in an Assembly; and that for many
causes. First, in hearing them apart, you have the advice of every man;
but in an Assembly may of them deliver their advise with I, or No, or
with their hands, or feet, not moved by their own sense, but by the
eloquence of another, or for feare of displeasing some that have spoken,
or the whole Assembly, by contradiction; or for feare of appearing
duller in apprehension, than those that have applauded the contrary
opinion. Secondly, in an Assembly of many, there cannot choose but be
some whose interests are contrary to that of the Publique; and these
their Interests make passionate, and Passion eloquent, and Eloquence
drawes others into the same advice. For the Passions of men, which
asunder are moderate, as the heat of one brand; in Assembly are like
many brands, that enflame one another, (especially when they blow one
another with Orations) to the setting of the Common-wealth on fire,
under pretence of Counselling it. Thirdly, in hearing every man apart,
one may examine (when there is need) the truth, or probability of
his reasons, and of the grounds of the advise he gives, by frequent
interruptions, and objections; which cannot be done in an Assembly,
where (in every difficult question) a man is rather astonied, and dazled
with the variety of discourse upon it, than informed of the course he
ought to take. Besides, there cannot be an Assembly of many, called
together for advice, wherein there be not some, that have the ambition
to be thought eloquent, and also learned in the Politiques; and give not
their advice with care of the businesse propounded, but of the applause
of their motly orations, made of the divers colored threds, or shreds of
Authors; which is an Impertinence at least, that takes away the time
of serious Consultation, and in the secret way of Counselling apart, is
easily avoided. Fourthly, in Deliberations that ought to be kept secret,
(whereof there be many occasions in Publique Businesse,) the Counsells
of many, and especially in Assemblies, are dangerous; And therefore
great Assemblies are necessitated to commit such affaires to lesser
numbers, and of such persons as are most versed, and in whose fidelity
they have most confidence.

To conclude, who is there that so far approves the taking of Counsell
from a great Assembly of Counsellours, that wisheth for, or would accept
of their pains, when there is a question of marrying his Children,
disposing of his Lands, governing his Household, or managing his
private Estate, especially if there be amongst them such as wish not
his prosperity? A man that doth his businesse by the help of many and
prudent Counsellours, with every one consulting apart in his proper
element, does it best, as he that useth able Seconds at Tennis play,
placed in their proper stations. He does next best, that useth his own
Judgement only; as he that has no Second at all. But he that is carried
up and down to his businesse in a framed Counsell, which cannot move
but by the plurality of consenting opinions, the execution whereof is
commonly (out of envy, or interest) retarded by the part dissenting,
does it worst of all, and like one that is carried to the ball, though
by good Players, yet in a Wheele-barrough, or other frame, heavy of it
self, and retarded also by the inconcurrent judgements, and endeavours
of them that drive it; and so much the more, as they be more that set
their hands to it; and most of all, when there is one, or more amongst
them, that desire to have him lose. And though it be true, that many eys
see more then one; yet it is not to be understood of many Counsellours;
but then only, when the finall Resolution is in one man. Otherwise,
because many eyes see the same thing in divers lines, and are apt to
look asquint towards their private benefit; they that desire not to
misse their marke, though they look about with two eyes, yet they never
ayme but with one; And therefore no great Popular Common-wealth was
ever kept up; but either by a forraign Enemy that united them; or by
the reputation of some one eminent Man amongst them; or by the secret
Counsell of a few; or by the mutuall feare of equall factions; and
not by the open Consultations of the Assembly. And as for very little
Common-wealths, be they Popular, or Monarchicall, there is no humane
wisdome can uphold them, longer then the Jealousy lasteth of their
potent Neighbours.



CHAPTER XXVI. OF CIVILL LAWES




Civill Law what

By CIVILL LAWES, I understand the Lawes, that men are therefore bound to
observe, because they are Members, not of this, or that Common-wealth
in particular, but of a Common-wealth. For the knowledge of particular
Lawes belongeth to them, that professe the study of the Lawes of their
severall Countries; but the knowledge of Civill Law in generall, to any
man. The antient Law of Rome was called their Civil Law, from the word
Civitas, which signifies a Common-wealth; And those Countries, which
having been under the Roman Empire, and governed by that Law, retaine
still such part thereof as they think fit, call that part the Civill
Law, to distinguish it from the rest of their own Civill Lawes. But that
is not it I intend to speak of here; my designe being not to shew what
is Law here, and there; but what is Law; as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero,
and divers others have done, without taking upon them the profession of
the study of the Law.

And first it manifest, that Law in generall, is not Counsell, but
Command; nor a Command of any man to any man; but only of him, whose
Command is addressed to one formerly obliged to obey him. And as for
Civill Law, it addeth only the name of the person Commanding, which is
Persona Civitatis, the Person of the Common-wealth.

Which considered, I define Civill Law in this Manner. "CIVILL LAW, Is to
every Subject, those Rules, which the Common-wealth hath Commanded him,
by Word, Writing, or other sufficient Sign of the Will, to make use
of, for the Distinction of Right, and Wrong; that is to say, of what is
contrary, and what is not contrary to the Rule."

In which definition, there is nothing that is not at first sight
evident. For every man seeth, that some Lawes are addressed to all the
Subjects in generall; some to particular Provinces; some to particular
Vocations; and some to particular Men; and are therefore Lawes, to every
of those to whom the Command is directed; and to none else. As also,
that Lawes are the Rules of Just, and Unjust; nothing being reputed
Unjust, that is not contrary to some Law. Likewise, that none can
make Lawes but the Common-wealth; because our Subjection is to the
Common-wealth only: and that Commands, are to be signified by sufficient
Signs; because a man knows not otherwise how to obey them. And
therefore, whatsoever can from this definition by necessary consequence
be deduced, ought to be acknowledged for truth. Now I deduce from it
this that followeth.




The Soveraign Is Legislator

1. The Legislator in all Common-wealths, is only the Soveraign, be he
one Man, as in a Monarchy, or one Assembly of men, as in a Democracy,
or Aristocracy. For the Legislator, is he that maketh the Law. And the
Common-wealth only, praescribes, and commandeth the observation of those
rules, which we call Law: Therefore the Common-wealth is the Legislator.
But the Common-wealth is no Person, nor has capacity to doe any thing,
but by the Representative, (that is, the Soveraign;) and therefore the
Soveraign is the sole Legislator. For the same reason, none can abrogate
a Law made, but the Soveraign; because a Law is not abrogated, but by
another Law, that forbiddeth it to be put in execution.




And Not Subject To Civill Law

2. The Soveraign of a Common-wealth, be it an Assembly, or one Man, is
not subject to the Civill Lawes. For having power to make, and repeale
Lawes, he may when he pleaseth, free himselfe from that subjection,
by repealing those Lawes that trouble him, and making of new; and
consequently he was free before. For he is free, that can be free when
he will: Nor is it possible for any person to be bound to himselfe;
because he that can bind, can release; and therefore he that is bound to
himselfe onely, is not bound.




Use, A Law Not By Vertue Of Time, But Of The Soveraigns Consent

3. When long Use obtaineth the authority of a Law, it is not the
Length of Time that maketh the Authority, but the Will of the Soveraign
signified by his silence, (for Silence is sometimes an argument of
Consent;) and it is no longer Law, then the Soveraign shall be silent
therein. And therefore if the Soveraign shall have a question of Right
grounded, not upon his present Will, but upon the Lawes formerly
made; the Length of Time shal bring no prejudice to his Right; but the
question shal be judged by Equity. For many unjust Actions, and unjust
Sentences, go uncontrolled a longer time, than any man can remember.
And our Lawyers account no Customes Law, but such as are reasonable, and
that evill Customes are to be abolished; But the Judgement of what is
reasonable, and of what is to be abolished, belongeth to him that maketh
the Law, which is the Soveraign Assembly, or Monarch.




The Law Of Nature, And The Civill Law Contain Each Other

4. The Law of Nature, and the Civill Law, contain each other, and are
of equall extent. For the Lawes of Nature, which consist in Equity,
Justice, Gratitude, and other morall Vertues on these depending, in the
condition of meer Nature (as I have said before in the end of the 15th
Chapter,) are not properly Lawes, but qualities that dispose men to
peace, and to obedience. When a Common-wealth is once settled, then are
they actually Lawes, and not before; as being then the commands of the
Common-wealth; and therefore also Civill Lawes: for it is the Soveraign
Power that obliges men to obey them. For in the differences of private
men, to declare, what is Equity, what is Justice, and what is morall
Vertue, and to make them binding, there is need of the Ordinances of
Soveraign Power, and Punishments to be ordained for such as shall break
them; which Ordinances are therefore part of the Civill Law. The Law of
Nature therefore is a part of the Civill Law in all Common-wealths of
the world. Reciprocally also, the Civill Law is a part of the Dictates
of Nature. For Justice, that is to say, Performance of Covenant, and
giving to every man his own, is a Dictate of the Law of Nature. But
every subject in a Common-wealth, hath covenanted to obey the Civill
Law, (either one with another, as when they assemble to make a common
Representative, or with the Representative it selfe one by one, when
subdued by the Sword they promise obedience, that they may receive
life;) And therefore Obedience to the Civill Law is part also of the
Law of Nature. Civill, and Naturall Law are not different kinds, but
different parts of Law; whereof one part being written, is called
Civill, the other unwritten, Naturall. But the Right of Nature, that
is, the naturall Liberty of man, may by the Civill Law be abridged,
and restrained: nay, the end of making Lawes, is no other, but such
Restraint; without the which there cannot possibly be any Peace. And Law
was brought into the world for nothing else, but to limit the naturall
liberty of particular men, in such manner, as they might not hurt, but
assist one another, and joyn together against a common Enemy.




Provinciall Lawes Are Not Made By Custome, But By The Soveraign Power

5. If the Soveraign of one Common-wealth, subdue a people that have
lived under other written Lawes, and afterwards govern them by the
same Lawes, by which they were governed before; yet those Lawes are the
Civill Lawes of the Victor, and not of the Vanquished Common-wealth, For
the Legislator is he, not by whose authority the Lawes were first made,
but by whose authority they now continue to be Lawes. And therefore
where there be divers Provinces, within the Dominion of a Common-wealth,
and in those Provinces diversity of Lawes, which commonly are called the
Customes of each severall Province, we are not to understand that such
Customes have their Force, onely from Length of Time; but that they were
antiently Lawes written, or otherwise made known, for the Constitutions,
and Statutes of their Soveraigns; and are now Lawes, not by vertue of
the Praescription of time, but by the Constitutions of their present
Soveraigns. But if an unwritten Law, in all the Provinces of a Dominion,
shall be generally observed, and no iniquity appear in the use thereof;
that law can be no other but a Law of Nature, equally obliging all
man-kind.




Some Foolish Opinions Of Lawyers Concerning The Making Of Lawes

6. Seeing then all Lawes, written, and unwritten, have their Authority,
and force, from the Will of the Common-wealth; that is to say, from the
Will of the Representative; which in a Monarchy is the Monarch, and
in other Common-wealths the Soveraign Assembly; a man may wonder from
whence proceed such opinions, as are found in the Books of Lawyers of
eminence in severall Common-wealths, directly, or by consequence making
the Legislative Power depend on private men, or subordinate Judges.
As for example, "That the Common Law, hath no Controuler but the
Parlament;" which is true onely where a Parlament has the Soveraign
Power, and cannot be assembled, nor dissolved, but by their own
discretion. For if there be a right in any else to dissolve them, there
is a right also to controule them, and consequently to controule their
controulings. And if there be no such right, then the Controuler of
Lawes is not Parlamentum, but Rex In Parlamento. And where a Parlament
is Soveraign, if it should assemble never so many, or so wise men, from
the Countries subject to them, for whatsoever cause; yet there is no man
will believe, that such an Assembly hath thereby acquired to themselves
a Legislative Power. Item, that the two arms of a Common-wealth,
are Force, and Justice; The First Whereof Is In The King; The Other
Deposited In The Hands Of The Parlament. As if a Common-wealth could
consist, where the Force were in any hand, which Justice had not the
Authority to command and govern.

7. That Law can never be against Reason, our Lawyers are agreed; and
that not the Letter,(that is, every construction of it,) but that which
is according to the Intention of the Legislator, is the Law. And it is
true: but the doubt is, of whose Reason it is, that shall be received
for Law. It is not meant of any private Reason; for then there would be
as much contradiction in the Lawes, as there is in the Schooles; nor yet
(as Sr. Ed, Coke makes it (Sir Edward Coke, upon Littleton Lib.2. Ch.6
fol 97.b),) an Artificiall Perfection of Reason, Gotten By Long Study,
Observation, And Experience, (as his was.) For it is possible long study
may encrease, and confirm erroneous Sentences: and where men build on
false grounds, the more they build, the greater is the ruine; and of
those that study, and observe with equall time, and diligence, the
reasons and resolutions are, and must remain discordant: and therefore
it is not that Juris Prudentia, or wisedome of subordinate Judges;
but the Reason of this our Artificiall Man the Common-wealth, and
his Command, that maketh Law: And the Common-wealth being in
their Representative but one Person, there cannot easily arise any
contradiction in the Lawes; and when there doth, the same Reason is
able, by interpretation, or alteration, to take it away. In all Courts
of Justice, the Soveraign (which is the Person of the Common-wealth,)
is he that Judgeth: The subordinate Judge, ought to have regard to the
reason, which moved his Soveraign to make such Law, that his Sentence
may be according thereunto; which then is his Soveraigns Sentence;
otherwise it is his own, and an unjust one.




Law Made, If Not Also Made Known, Is No Law

8. From this, that the Law is a Command, and a Command consisteth in
declaration, or manifestation of the will of him that commandeth, by
voyce, writing, or some other sufficient argument of the same, we may
understand, that the Command of the Common-wealth, is Law onely to
those, that have means to take notice of it. Over naturall fooles,
children, or mad-men there is no Law, no more than over brute beasts;
nor are they capable of the title of just, or unjust; because they had
never power to make any covenant, or to understand the consequences
thereof; and consequently never took upon them to authorise the
actions of any Soveraign, as they must do that make to themselves a
Common-wealth. And as those from whom Nature, or Accident hath taken
away the notice of all Lawes in generall; so also every man, from whom
any accident, not proceeding from his own default, hath taken away the
means to take notice of any particular Law, is excused, if he observe it
not; And to speak properly, that Law is no Law to him. It is therefore
necessary, to consider in this place, what arguments, and signes be
sufficient for the knowledge of what is the Law; that is to say, what is
the will of the Soveraign, as well in Monarchies, as in other formes of
government.




Unwritten Lawes Are All Of Them Lawes Of Nature

And first, if it be a Law that obliges all the Subjects without
exception, and is not written, nor otherwise published in such places as
they may take notice thereof, it is a Law of Nature. For whatsoever men
are to take knowledge of for Law, not upon other mens words, but every
one from his own reason, must be such as is agreeable to the reason of
all men; which no Law can be, but the Law of Nature. The Lawes of Nature
therefore need not any publishing, nor Proclamation; as being contained
in this one Sentence, approved by all the world, "Do not that to
another, which thou thinkest unreasonable to be done by another to thy
selfe."

Secondly, if it be a Law that obliges only some condition of men, or one
particular man and be not written, nor published by word, then also it
is a Law of Nature; and known by the same arguments, and signs,
that distinguish those in such a condition, from other Subjects. For
whatsoever Law is not written, or some way published by him that makes
it Law, can be known no way, but by the reason of him that is to obey
it; and is therefore also a Law not only Civill, but Naturall. For
example, if the Soveraign employ a Publique Minister, without written
Instructions what to doe; he is obliged to take for Instructions the
Dictates of Reason; As if he make a Judge, The Judge is to take notice,
that his Sentence ought to be according to the reason of his Soveraign,
which being alwaies understood to be Equity, he is bound to it by the
Law of Nature: Or if an Ambassador, he is (in al things not conteined
in his written Instructions) to take for Instruction that which Reason
dictates to be most conducing to his Soveraigns interest; and so of
all other Ministers of the Soveraignty, publique and private. All which
Instructions of naturall Reason may be comprehended under one name of
Fidelity; which is a branch of naturall Justice.

The Law of Nature excepted, it belongeth to the essence of all other
Lawes, to be made known, to every man that shall be obliged to obey
them, either by word, or writing, or some other act, known to proceed
from the Soveraign Authority. For the will of another, cannot be
understood, but by his own word, or act, or by conjecture taken from his
scope and purpose; which in the person of the Common-wealth, is to be
supposed alwaies consonant to Equity and Reason. And in antient time,
before letters were in common use, the Lawes were many times put into
verse; that the rude people taking pleasure in singing, or reciting
them, might the more easily reteine them in memory. And for the same
reason Solomon adviseth a man, to bind the ten Commandements (Prov. 7.
3) upon his ten fingers. And for the Law which Moses gave to the people
of Israel at the renewing of the Covenant, (Deut. 11. 19) he biddeth
them to teach it their Children, by discoursing of it both at home, and
upon the way; at going to bed, and at rising from bed; and to write
it upon the posts, and dores of their houses; and (Deut. 31. 12) to
assemble the people, man, woman, and child, to heare it read.




Nothing Is Law Where The Legislator Cannot Be Known

Nor is it enough the Law be written, and published; but also that there
be manifest signs, that it proceedeth from the will of the Soveraign.
For private men, when they have, or think they have force enough to
secure their unjust designes, and convoy them safely to their ambitious
ends, may publish for Lawes what they please, without, or against
the Legislative Authority. There is therefore requisite, not only a
Declaration of the Law, but also sufficient signes of the Author, and
Authority. The Author, or Legislator is supposed in every Common-wealth
to be evident, because he is the Soveraign, who having been Constituted
by the consent of every one, is supposed by every one to be sufficiently
known. And though the ignorance, and security of men be such, for the
most part, as that when the memory of the first Constitution of their
Common-wealth is worn out, they doe not consider, by whose power they
use to be defended against their enemies, and to have their industry
protected, and to be righted when injury is done them; yet because no
man that considers, can make question of it, no excuse can be derived
from the ignorance of where the Soveraignty is placed. And it is a
Dictate of Naturall Reason, and consequently an evident Law of Nature,
that no man ought to weaken that power, the protection whereof he hath
himself demanded, or wittingly received against others. Therefore of
who is Soveraign, no man, but by his own fault, (whatsoever evill men
suggest,) can make any doubt. The difficulty consisteth in the evidence
of the Authority derived from him; The removing whereof, dependeth on
the knowledge of the publique Registers, publique Counsels, publique
Ministers, and publique Seales; by which all Lawes are sufficiently
verified.




Difference Between Verifying And Authorising

Verifyed, I say, not Authorised: for the Verification, is but the
Testimony and Record; not the Authority of the law; which consisteth in
the Command of the Soveraign only.




The Law Verifyed By The Subordinate Judge

If therefore a man have a question of Injury, depending on the Law of
Nature; that is to say, on common Equity; the Sentence of the Judge,
that by Commission hath Authority to take cognisance of such causes, is
a sufficient Verification of the Law of Nature in that individuall case.
For though the advice of one that professeth the study of the Law, be
usefull for the avoyding of contention; yet it is but advice; tis the
Judge must tell men what is Law, upon the hearing of the Controversy.




By The Publique Registers

But when the question is of injury, or crime, upon a written Law; every
man by recourse to the Registers, by himself, or others, may (if he
will) be sufficiently enformed, before he doe such injury, or commit the
crime, whither it be an injury, or not: Nay he ought to doe so: for when
a man doubts whether the act he goeth about, be just, or injust; and may
informe himself, if he will; the doing is unlawfull. In like manner, he
that supposeth himself injured, in a case determined by the written Law,
which he may by himself, or others see and consider; if he complaine
before he consults with the Law, he does unjustly, and bewrayeth a
disposition rather to vex other men, than to demand his own right.




By Letters Patent, And Publique Seale

If the question be of Obedience to a publique Officer; To have seen his
Commission, with the Publique Seale, and heard it read; or to have
had the means to be informed of it, if a man would, is a sufficient
Verification of his Authority. For every man is obliged to doe his best
endeavour, to informe himself of all written Lawes, that may concerne
his own future actions.




The Interpretation Of The Law Dependeth On The Soveraign Power

The Legislator known; and the Lawes, either by writing, or by the
light of Nature, sufficiently published; there wanteth yet another
very materiall circumstance to make them obligatory. For it is not the
Letter, but the Intendment, or Meaning; that is to say, the authentique
Interpretation of the Law (which is the sense of the Legislator,) in
which the nature of the Law consisteth; And therefore the Interpretation
of all Lawes dependeth on the Authority Soveraign; and the Interpreters
can be none but those, which the Soveraign, (to whom only the
Subject oweth obedience) shall appoint. For else, by the craft of an
Interpreter, the Law my be made to beare a sense, contrary to that of
the Soveraign; by which means the Interpreter becomes the Legislator.




All Lawes Need Interpretation

All Laws, written, and unwritten, have need of Interpretation.
The unwritten Law of Nature, though it be easy to such, as without
partiality, and passion, make use of their naturall reason, and
therefore leaves the violators thereof without excuse; yet considering
there be very few, perhaps none, that in some cases are not blinded by
self love, or some other passion, it is now become of all Laws the most
obscure; and has consequently the greatest need of able Interpreters.
The written Laws, if they be short, are easily mis-interpreted, from the
divers significations of a word, or two; if long, they be more obscure
by the diverse significations of many words: in so much as no written
Law, delivered in few, or many words, can be well understood, without a
perfect understanding of the finall causes, for which the Law was
made; the knowledge of which finall causes is in the Legislator. To him
therefore there can not be any knot in the Law, insoluble; either by
finding out the ends, to undoe it by; or else by making what ends he
will, (as Alexander did with his sword in the Gordian knot,) by the
Legislative power; which no other Interpreter can doe.




The Authenticall Interpretation Of Law Is Not That Of Writers

The Interpretation of the Lawes of Nature, in a Common-wealth, dependeth
not on the books of Morall Philosophy. The Authority of writers, without
the Authority of the Common-wealth, maketh not their opinions Law,
be they never so true. That which I have written in this Treatise,
concerning the Morall Vertues, and of their necessity, for the
procuring, and maintaining peace, though it bee evident Truth, is not
therefore presently Law; but because in all Common-wealths in the world,
it is part of the Civill Law: For though it be naturally reasonable; yet
it is by the Soveraigne Power that it is Law: Otherwise, it were a great
errour, to call the Lawes of Nature unwritten Law; whereof wee see
so many volumes published, and in them so many contradictions of one
another, and of themselves.




The Interpreter Of The Law Is The Judge Giving Sentence Vivâ Voce In
Every Particular Case

The Interpretation of the Law of Nature, is the Sentence of the Judge
constituted by the Soveraign Authority, to heare and determine such
controversies, as depend thereon; and consisteth in the application of
the Law to the present case. For in the act of Judicature, the Judge
doth no more but consider, whither the demand of the party, be consonant
to naturall reason, and Equity; and the Sentence he giveth, is therefore
the Interpretation of the Law of Nature; which Interpretation is
Authentique; not because it is his private Sentence; but because
he giveth it by Authority of the Soveraign, whereby it becomes the
Soveraigns Sentence; which is Law for that time, to the parties
pleading.




The Sentence Of A Judge, Does Not Bind Him, Or Another Judge To Give
Like Sentence In Like Cases Ever After

But because there is no Judge Subordinate, nor Soveraign, but may erre
in a Judgement of Equity; if afterward in another like case he find it
more consonant to Equity to give a contrary Sentence, he is obliged to
doe it. No mans error becomes his own Law; nor obliges him to persist
in it. Neither (for the same reason) becomes it a Law to other Judges,
though sworn to follow it. For though a wrong Sentence given by
authority of the Soveraign, if he know and allow it, in such Lawes as
are mutable, be a constitution of a new Law, in cases, in which every
little circumstance is the same; yet in Lawes immutable, such as are the
Lawes of Nature, they are no Lawes to the same, or other Judges, in the
like cases for ever after. Princes succeed one another; and one Judge
passeth, another commeth; nay, Heaven and Earth shall passe; but not one
title of the Law of Nature shall passe; for it is the Eternall Law of
God. Therefore all the Sentences of precedent Judges that have ever
been, cannot all together make a Law contrary to naturall Equity: Nor
any Examples of former Judges, can warrant an unreasonable Sentence, or
discharge the present Judge of the trouble of studying what is Equity
(in the case he is to Judge,) from the principles of his own naturall
reason. For example sake, ’Tis against the Law of Nature, To Punish The
Innocent; and Innocent is he that acquitteth himselfe Judicially, and is
acknowledged for Innocent by the Judge. Put the case now, that a man is
accused of a capitall crime, and seeing the powers and malice of some
enemy, and the frequent corruption and partiality of Judges, runneth
away for feare of the event, and afterwards is taken, and brought to a
legall triall, and maketh it sufficiently appear, he was not guilty of
the crime, and being thereof acquitted, is neverthelesse condemned to
lose his goods; this is a manifest condemnation of the Innocent. I say
therefore, that there is no place in the world, where this can be an
interpretation of a Law of Nature, or be made a Law by the Sentences of
precedent Judges, that had done the same. For he that judged it first,
judged unjustly; and no Injustice can be a pattern of Judgement to
succeeding Judges. A written Law may forbid innocent men to fly, and
they may be punished for flying: But that flying for feare of injury,
should be taken for presumption of guilt, after a man is already
absolved of the crime Judicially, is contrary to the nature of a
Presumption, which hath no place after Judgement given. Yet this is set
down by a great Lawyer for the common Law of England. "If a man," saith
he, "that is Innocent, be accused of Felony, and for feare flyeth for
the same; albeit he judicially acquitteth himselfe of the Felony; yet
if it be found that he fled for the Felony, he shall notwithstanding his
Innocency, Forfeit all his goods, chattels, debts, and duties. For as
to the Forfeiture of them, the Law will admit no proofe against the
Presumption in Law, grounded upon his flight." Here you see, An Innocent
Man, Judicially Acquitted, Notwithstanding His Innocency, (when no
written Law forbad him to fly) after his acquitall, Upon A Presumption
In Law, condemned to lose all the goods he hath. If the Law ground upon
his flight a Presumption of the fact, (which was Capitall,) the Sentence
ought to have been Capitall: if the presumption were not of the Fact,
for what then ought he to lose his goods? This therefore is no Law of
England; nor is the condemnation grounded upon a Presumption of Law, but
upon the Presumption of the Judges. It is also against Law, to say
that no Proofe shall be admitted against a Presumption of Law. For
all Judges, Soveraign and subordinate, if they refuse to heare Proofe,
refuse to do Justice: for though the Sentence be Just, yet the Judges
that condemn without hearing the Proofes offered, are Unjust Judges; and
their Presumption is but Prejudice; which no man ought to bring with him
to the Seat of Justice, whatsoever precedent judgements, or examples he
shall pretend to follow. There be other things of this nature, wherein
mens Judgements have been perverted, by trusting to Precedents: but this
is enough to shew, that though the Sentence of the Judge, be a Law to
the party pleading, yet it is no Law to any Judge, that shall succeed
him in that Office.

In like manner, when question is of the Meaning of written Lawes, he is
not the Interpreter of them, that writeth a Commentary upon them. For
Commentaries are commonly more subject to cavill, than the Text; and
therefore need other Commentaries; and so there will be no end of such
Interpretation. And therefore unlesse there be an Interpreter authorised
by the Soveraign, from which the subordinate Judges are not to recede,
the Interpreter can be no other than the ordinary Judges, in the some
manner, as they are in cases of the unwritten Law; and their Sentences
are to be taken by them that plead, for Lawes in that particular case;
but not to bind other Judges, in like cases to give like judgements.
For a Judge may erre in the Interpretation even of written Lawes; but no
errour of a subordinate Judge, can change the Law, which is the generall
Sentence of the Soveraigne.




The Difference Between The Letter And Sentence Of The Law

In written Lawes, men use to make a difference between the Letter, and
the Sentence of the Law: And when by the Letter, is meant whatsoever
can be gathered from the bare words, ’tis well distinguished. For the
significations of almost all words, are either in themselves, or in the
metaphoricall use of them, ambiguous; and may be drawn in argument, to
make many senses; but there is onely one sense of the Law. But if by the
Letter, be meant the Literall sense, then the Letter, and the Sentence
or intention of the Law, is all one. For the literall sense is that,
which the Legislator is alwayes supposed to be Equity: For it were a
great contumely for a Judge to think otherwise of the Soveraigne.
He ought therefore, if the Word of the Law doe not fully authorise a
reasonable Sentence, to supply it with the Law of Nature; or if the
case be difficult, to respit Judgement till he have received more ample
authority. For Example, a written Law ordaineth, that he which is thrust
out of his house by force, shall be restored by force: It happens that
a man by negligence leaves his house empty, and returning is kept out by
force, in which case there is no speciall Law ordained. It is evident,
that this case is contained in the same Law: for else there is no remedy
for him at all; which is to be supposed against the Intention of the
Legislator. Again, the word of the Law, commandeth to Judge according
to the Evidence: A man is accused falsly of a fact, which the Judge saw
himself done by another; and not by him that is accused. In this case
neither shall the Letter of the Law be followed to the condemnation of
the Innocent, nor shall the Judge give Sentence against the evidence
of the Witnesses; because the Letter of the Law is to the contrary:
but procure of the Soveraign that another be made Judge, and himselfe
Witnesse. So that the incommodity that follows the bare words of a
written Law, may lead him to the Intention of the Law, whereby to
interpret the same the better; though no Incommodity can warrant a
Sentence against the Law. For every Judge of Right, and Wrong, is not
Judge of what is Commodious, or Incommodious to the Common-wealth.




The Abilities Required In A Judge

The abilities required in a good Interpreter of the Law, that is to say,
in a good Judge, are not the same with those of an Advocate; namely the
study of the Lawes. For a Judge, as he ought to take notice of the Fact,
from none but the Witnesses; so also he ought to take notice of the
Law, from nothing but the Statutes, and Constitutions of the Soveraign,
alledged in the pleading, or declared to him by some that have authority
from the Soveraign Power to declare them; and need not take care
before-hand, what hee shall Judge; for it shall bee given him what hee
shall say concerning the Fact, by Witnesses; and what hee shall say in
point of Law, from those that shall in their pleadings shew it, and by
authority interpret it upon the place. The Lords of Parlament in England
were Judges, and most difficult causes have been heard and determined
by them; yet few of them were much versed in the study of the Lawes,
and fewer had made profession of them: and though they consulted with
Lawyers, that were appointed to be present there for that purpose; yet
they alone had the authority of giving Sentence. In like manner, in
the ordinary trialls of Right, Twelve men of the common People, are the
Judges, and give Sentence, not onely of the Fact, but of the Right; and
pronounce simply for the Complaynant, or for the Defendant; that is to
say, are Judges not onely of the Fact, but also of the Right: and in a
question of crime, not onely determine whether done, or not done; but
also whether it be Murder, Homicide, Felony, Assault, and the like,
which are determinations of Law: but because they are not supposed to
know the Law of themselves, there is one that hath Authority to enforme
them of it, in the particular case they are to Judge of. But yet if they
judge not according to that he tells them, they are not subject thereby
to any penalty; unlesse it be made appear, they did it against their
consciences, or had been corrupted by reward. The things that make
a good Judge, or good Interpreter of the Lawes, are, first A Right
Understanding of that principall Law of Nature called Equity; which
depending not on the reading of other mens Writings, but on the
goodnesse of a mans own naturall Reason, and Meditation, is presumed
to be in those most, that have had most leisure, and had the most
inclination to meditate thereon. Secondly, Contempt Of Unnecessary
Riches, and Preferments. Thirdly, To Be Able In Judgement To Devest
Himselfe Of All Feare, Anger, Hatred, Love, And Compassion. Fourthly,
and lastly, Patience To Heare; Diligent Attention In Hearing; And Memory
To Retain, Digest And Apply What He Hath Heard.




Divisions Of Law

The difference and division of the Lawes, has been made in divers
manners, according to the different methods, of those men that have
written of them. For it is a thing that dependeth not on Nature, but on
the scope of the Writer; and is subservient to every mans proper method.
In the Institutions of Justinian, we find seven sorts of Civill Lawes.

1. The Edicts, Constitutions, and Epistles Of The Prince, that is, of
the Emperour; because the whole power of the people was in him. Like
these, are the Proclamations of the Kings of England.

2. The Decrees Of The Whole People Of Rome (comprehending the Senate,)
when they were put to the Question by the Senate. These were Lawes, at
first, by the vertue of the Soveraign Power residing in the people; and
such of them as by the Emperours were not abrogated, remained Lawes by
the Authority Imperiall. For all Lawes that bind, are understood to be
Lawes by his authority that has power to repeale them. Somewhat like to
these Lawes, are the Acts of Parliament in England.

3. The Decrees Of The Common People (excluding the Senate,) when they
were put to the question by the Tribune of the people. For such of them
as were not abrogated by the Emperours, remained Lawes by the Authority
Imperiall. Like to these, were the Orders of the House of Commons in
England.

4. Senatus Consulta, the Orders Of The Senate; because when the people
of Rome grew so numerous, as it was inconvenient to assemble them; it
was thought fit by the Emperour, that men should Consult the Senate in
stead of the people: And these have some resemblance with the Acts of
Counsell.

5. The Edicts Of Praetors, and (in some Cases) of the Aediles: such as
are the Chiefe Justices in the Courts of England.

6. Responsa Prudentum; which were the Sentences, and Opinions of those
Lawyers, to whom the Emperour gave Authority to interpret the Law, and
to give answer to such as in matter of Law demanded their advice;
which Answers, the Judges in giving Judgement were obliged by the
Constitutions of the Emperour to observe; And should be like the Reports
of Cases Judged, if other Judges be by the Law of England bound to
observe them. For the Judges of the Common Law of England, are not
properly Judges, but Juris Consulti; of whom the Judges, who are either
the Lords, or Twelve men of the Country, are in point of Law to ask
advice.

7. Also, Unwritten Customes, (which in their own nature are an imitation
of Law,) by the tacite consent of the Emperour, in case they be not
contrary to the Law of Nature, are very Lawes.

Another division of Lawes, is into Naturall and Positive. Naturall are
those which have been Lawes from all Eternity; and are called not onely
Naturall, but also Morall Lawes; consisting in the Morall Vertues, as
Justice, Equity, and all habits of the mind that conduce to Peace, and
Charity; of which I have already spoken in the fourteenth and fifteenth
Chapters.

Positive, are those which have not been for Eternity; but have been
made Lawes by the Will of those that have had the Soveraign Power over
others; and are either written, or made known to men, by some other
argument of the Will of their Legislator.




Another Division Of Law

Again, of Positive Lawes some are Humane, some Divine; And of Humane
positive lawes, some are Distributive, some Penal. Distributive are
those that determine the Rights of the Subjects, declaring to every man
what it is, by which he acquireth and holdeth a propriety in lands,
or goods, and a right or liberty of action; and these speak to all
the Subjects. Penal are those, which declare, what Penalty shall be
inflicted on those that violate the Law; and speak to the Ministers
and Officers ordained for execution. For though every one ought to be
informed of the Punishments ordained beforehand for their transgression;
neverthelesse the Command is not addressed to the Delinquent, (who
cannot be supposed will faithfully punish himselfe,) but to publique
Ministers appointed to see the Penalty executed. And these Penal Lawes
are for the most part written together with the Lawes Distributive; and
are sometimes called Judgements. For all Lawes are generall judgements,
or Sentences of the Legislator; as also every particular Judgement, is a
Law to him, whose case is Judged.




Divine Positive Law How Made Known To Be Law

Divine Positive Lawes (for Naturall Lawes being Eternall, and
Universall, are all Divine,) are those, which being the Commandements of
God, (not from all Eternity, nor universally addressed to all men, but
onely to a certain people, or to certain persons,) are declared for
such, by those whom God hath authorised to declare them. But this
Authority of man to declare what be these Positive Lawes of God, how can
it be known? God may command a man by a supernaturall way, to deliver
Lawes to other men. But because it is of the essence of Law, that he who
is to be obliged, be assured of the Authority of him that declareth
it, which we cannot naturally take notice to be from God, How Can A Man
Without Supernaturall Revelation Be Assured Of The Revelation Received
By The Declarer? and How Can He Be Bound To Obey Them? For the first
question, how a man can be assured of the Revelation of another, without
a Revelation particularly to himselfe, it is evidently impossible:
for though a man may be induced to believe such Revelation, from the
Miracles they see him doe, or from seeing the Extraordinary sanctity of
his life, or from seeing the Extraordinary wisedome, or Extraordinary
felicity of his Actions, all which are marks of Gods extraordinary
favour; yet they are not assured evidence of speciall Revelation.
Miracles are Marvellous workes: but that which is marvellous to one,
may not be so to another. Sanctity may be feigned; and the visible
felicities of this world, are most often the work of God by Naturall,
and ordinary causes. And therefore no man can infallibly know by
naturall reason, that another has had a supernaturall revelation of Gods
will; but only a beliefe; every one (as the signs thereof shall appear
greater, or lesser) a firmer, or a weaker belief.

But for the second, how he can be bound to obey them; it is not so hard.
For if the Law declared, be not against the Law of Nature (which is
undoubtedly Gods Law) and he undertake to obey it, he is bound by his
own act; bound I say to obey it, but not bound to believe it: for mens
beliefe, and interiour cogitations, are not subject to the commands,
but only to the operation of God, ordinary, or extraordinary. Faith of
Supernaturall Law, is not a fulfilling, but only an assenting to the
same; and not a duty that we exhibite to God, but a gift which God
freely giveth to whom he pleaseth; as also Unbelief is not a breach
of any of his Lawes; but a rejection of them all, except the Lawes
Naturall. But this that I say, will be made yet cleerer, by the
Examples, and Testimonies concerning this point in holy Scripture. The
Covenant God made with Abraham (in a Supernaturall Manner) was thus,
(Gen. 17. 10) "This is the Covenant which thou shalt observe between
Me and Thee and thy Seed after thee." Abrahams Seed had not this
revelation, nor were yet in being; yet they are a party to the Covenant,
and bound to obey what Abraham should declare to them for Gods Law;
which they could not be, but in vertue of the obedience they owed to
their Parents; who (if they be Subject to no other earthly power, as
here in the case of Abraham) have Soveraign power over their children,
and servants. Againe, where God saith to Abraham, "In thee shall all
Nations of the earth be blessed: For I know thou wilt command thy
children, and thy house after thee to keep the way of the Lord, and to
observe Righteousnesse and Judgement," it is manifest, the obedience of
his Family, who had no Revelation, depended on their former obligation
to obey their Soveraign. At Mount Sinai Moses only went up to God; the
people were forbidden to approach on paine of death; yet were they bound
to obey all that Moses declared to them for Gods Law. Upon what ground,
but on this submission of their own, "Speak thou to us, and we will
heare thee; but let not God speak to us, lest we dye?" By which two
places it sufficiently appeareth, that in a Common-wealth, a subject
that has no certain and assured Revelation particularly to himself
concerning the Will of God, is to obey for such, the Command of
the Common-wealth: for if men were at liberty, to take for Gods
Commandements, their own dreams, and fancies, or the dreams and
fancies of private men; scarce two men would agree upon what is Gods
Commandement; and yet in respect of them, every man would despise the
Commandements of the Common-wealth. I conclude therefore, that in all
things not contrary to the Morall Law, (that is to say, to the Law of
Nature,) all Subjects are bound to obey that for divine Law, which is
declared to be so, by the Lawes of the Common-wealth. Which also is
evident to any mans reason; for whatsoever is not against the Law of
Nature, may be made Law in the name of them that have the Soveraign
power; and there is no reason men should be the lesse obliged by it,
when tis propounded in the name of God. Besides, there is no place in
the world where men are permitted to pretend other Commandements of God,
than are declared for such by the Common-wealth. Christian States punish
those that revolt from Christian Religion, and all other States, those
that set up any Religion by them forbidden. For in whatsoever is not
regulated by the Common-wealth, tis Equity (which is the Law of Nature,
and therefore an eternall Law of God) that every man equally enjoy his
liberty.




Another Division Of Lawes

There is also another distinction of Laws, into Fundamentall, and Not
Fundamentall: but I could never see in any Author, what a Fundamentall
Law signifieth. Neverthelesse one may very reasonably distinguish Laws
in that manner.




A Fundamentall Law What

For a Fundamentall Law in every Common-wealth is that, which being taken
away, the Common-wealth faileth, and is utterly dissolved; as a building
whose Foundation is destroyed. And therefore a Fundamentall Law is that,
by which Subjects are bound to uphold whatsoever power is given to the
Soveraign, whether a Monarch, or a Soveraign Assembly, without which the
Common-wealth cannot stand, such as is the power of War and Peace, of
Judicature, of Election of Officers, and of doing whatsoever he shall
think necessary for the Publique good. Not Fundamentall is that
the abrogating whereof, draweth not with it the dissolution of the
Common-Wealth; such as are the Lawes Concerning Controversies between
subject and subject. Thus much of the Division of Lawes.




Difference Between Law And Right

I find the words Lex Civilis, and Jus Civile, that is to say, Law and
Right Civil, promiscuously used for the same thing, even in the most
learned Authors; which neverthelesse ought not to be so. For Right is
Liberty, namely that Liberty which the Civil Law leaves us: But Civill
Law is an Obligation; and takes from us the Liberty which the Law of
Nature gave us. Nature gave a Right to every man to secure himselfe
by his own strength, and to invade a suspected neighbour, by way of
prevention; but the Civill Law takes away that Liberty, in all cases
where the protection of the Lawe may be safely stayd for. Insomuch as
Lex and Jus, are as different as Obligation and Liberty.




And Between A Law And A Charter

Likewise Lawes and Charters are taken promiscuously for the same
thing. Yet Charters are Donations of the Soveraign; and not Lawes, but
exemptions from Law. The phrase of a Law is Jubeo, Injungo, I Command,
and Enjoyn: the phrase of a Charter is Dedi, Concessi, I Have Given, I
Have Granted: but what is given or granted, to a man, is not forced
upon him, by a Law. A Law may be made to bind All the Subjects of a
Common-wealth: a Liberty, or Charter is only to One man, or some One
part of the people. For to say all the people of a Common-wealth, have
Liberty in any case whatsoever; is to say, that in such case, there hath
been no Law made; or else having been made, is now abrogated.



CHAPTER XXVII. OF CRIMES, EXCUSES, AND EXTENUATIONS



Sinne What

A Sinne, is not onely a Transgression of a Law, but also any Contempt of
the Legislator. For such Contempt, is a breach of all his Lawes at once.
And therefore may consist, not onely in the Commission of a Fact, or in
the Speaking of Words by the Lawes forbidden, or in the Omission of
what the Law commandeth, but also in the Intention, or purpose to
transgresse. For the purpose to breake the Law, is some degree of
Contempt of him, to whom it belongeth to see it executed. To be
delighted in the Imagination onely, of being possessed of another mans
goods, servants, or wife, without any intention to take them from him
by force, or fraud, is no breach of the Law, that sayth, "Thou shalt not
covet:" nor is the pleasure a man my have in imagining, or dreaming of
the death of him, from whose life he expecteth nothing but dammage, and
displeasure, a Sinne; but the resolving to put some Act in execution,
that tendeth thereto. For to be pleased in the fiction of that, which
would please a man if it were reall, is a Passion so adhaerent to the
Nature both of a man, and every other living creature, as to make it a
Sinne, were to make Sinne of being a man. The consideration of this,
has made me think them too severe, both to themselves, and others, that
maintain, that the First motions of the mind, (though checked with the
fear of God) be Sinnes. But I confesse it is safer to erre on that hand,
than on the other.




A Crime What

A Crime, is a sinne, consisting in the Committing (by Deed, or Word)
of that which the Law forbiddeth, or the Omission of what it hath
commanded. So that every Crime is a sinne; but not every sinne a Crime.
To intend to steale, or kill, is a sinne, though it never appeare in
Word, or Fact: for God that seeth the thoughts of man, can lay it to
his charge: but till it appear by some thing done, or said, by which
the intention may be Crime; which distinction the Greeks observed in
the word amartema, and egklema, or aitia; wherof the former, (which is
translated Sinne,) signifieth any swarving from the Law whatsoever; but
the two later, (which are translated Crime,) signifie that sinne onely,
whereof one man may accuse another. But of Intentions, which never
appear by any outward act, there is no place for humane accusation. In
like manner the Latines by Peccatum, which is Sinne, signifie all manner
of deviation from the Law; but by crimen, (which word they derive from
Cerno, which signifies to perceive,) they mean onely such sinnes, as my
be made appear before a Judge; and therfore are not meer Intentions.




Where No Civill Law Is, There Is No Crime

From this relation of Sinne to the Law, and of Crime to the Civill
Law, may be inferred, First, that where Law ceaseth, Sinne ceaseth.
But because the Law of Nature is eternall, Violation of Covenants,
Ingratitude, Arrogance, and all Facts contrary to any Morall vertue, can
never cease to be Sinne. Secondly, that the Civill Law ceasing, Crimes
cease: for there being no other Law remaining, but that of Nature, there
is no place for Accusation; every man being his own Judge, and accused
onely by his own Conscience, and cleared by the Uprightnesse of his own
Intention. When therefore his Intention is Right, his fact is no Sinne:
if otherwise, his fact is Sinne; but not Crime. Thirdly, That when the
Soveraign Power ceaseth, Crime also ceaseth: for where there is no such
Power, there is no protection to be had from the Law; and therefore
every one may protect himself by his own power: for no man in the
Institution of Soveraign Power can be supposed to give away the Right
of preserving his own body; for the safety whereof all Soveraignty was
ordained. But this is to be understood onely of those, that have not
themselves contributed to the taking away of the Power that protected
them: for that was a Crime from the beginning.




Ignorance Of The Law Of Nature Excuseth No Man

The source of every Crime, is some defect of the Understanding; or some
errour in Reasoning, or some sudden force of the Passions. Defect in
the Understanding, is Ignorance; in Reasoning, Erroneous Opinion. Again,
ignorance is of three sort; of the Law, and of the Soveraign, and of the
Penalty. Ignorance of the Law of Nature Excuseth no man; because every
man that hath attained to the use of Reason, is supposed to know, he
ought not to do to another, what he would not have done to himselfe.
Therefore into what place soever a man shall come, if he do any thing
contrary to that Law, it is a Crime. If a man come from the Indies
hither, and perswade men here to receive a new Religion, or teach them
any thing that tendeth to disobedience of the Lawes of this Country,
though he be never so well perswaded of the truth of what he teacheth,
he commits a Crime, and may be justly punished for the same, not onely
because his doctrine is false, but also because he does that which he
would not approve in another, namely, that comming from hence, he should
endeavour to alter the Religion there. But ignorance of the Civill Law,
shall Excuse a man in a strange Country, till it be declared to him;
because, till then no Civill Law is binding.




Ignorance Of The Civill Law Excuseth Sometimes

In the like manner, if the Civill Law of a mans own Country, be not
so sufficiently declared, as he may know it if he will; nor the Action
against the Law of Nature; the Ignorance is a good Excuse: In other
cases ignorance of the Civill Law, Excuseth not.




Ignorance Of The Soveraign Excuseth Not

Ignorance of the Soveraign Power, in the place of a mans ordinary
residence, Excuseth him not; because he ought to take notice of the
Power, by which he hath been protected there.




Ignorance Of The Penalty Excuseth Not

Ignorance of the Penalty, where the Law is declared, Excuseth no man:
For in breaking the Law, which without a fear of penalty to follow, were
not a Law, but vain words, he undergoeth the penalty, though he know not
what it is; because, whosoever voluntarily doth any action, accepteth
all the known consequences of it; but Punishment is a known consequence
of the violation of the Lawes, in every Common-wealth; which punishment,
if it be determined already by the Law, he is subject to that; if not,
then is he subject to Arbitrary punishment. For it is reason, that he
which does Injury, without other limitation than that of his own Will,
should suffer punishment without other limitation, than that of his Will
whose Law is thereby violated.




Punishments Declared Before The Fact, Excuse From Greater Punishments
After It

But when a penalty, is either annexed to the Crime in the Law it selfe,
or hath been usually inflicted in the like cases; there the Delinquent
is Excused from a greater penalty. For the punishment foreknown, if not
great enough to deterre men from the action, is an invitement to it:
because when men compare the benefit of their Injustice, with the harm
of their punishment, by necessity of Nature they choose that which
appeareth best for themselves; and therefore when they are punished more
than the Law had formerly determined, or more than others were punished
for the same Crime; it the Law that tempted, and deceiveth them.




Nothing Can Be Made A Crime By A Law Made After The Fact

No Law, made after a Fact done, can make it a Crime: because if the
Fact be against the Law of Nature, the Law was before the Fact; and a
Positive Law cannot be taken notice of, before it be made; and therefore
cannot be Obligatory. But when the Law that forbiddeth a Fact, is made
before the Fact be done; yet he that doth the Fact, is lyable to the
Penalty ordained after, in case no lesser Penalty were made known
before, neither by Writing, nor by Example, for the reason immediatly
before alledged.




False Principles Of Right And Wrong Causes Of Crime

From defect in Reasoning, (that is to say, from Errour,) men are prone
to violate the Lawes, three wayes. First, by Presumption of false
Principles; as when men from having observed how in all places, and
in all ages, unjust Actions have been authorised, by the force, and
victories of those who have committed them; and that potent men,
breaking through the Cob-web Lawes of their Country, the weaker sort,
and those that have failed in their Enterprises, have been esteemed the
onely Criminals; have thereupon taken for Principles, and grounds of
their Reasoning, "That Justice is but a vain word: That whatsoever a man
can get by his own Industry, and hazard, is his own: That the Practice
of all Nations cannot be unjust: That examples of former times are good
Arguments of doing the like again;" and many more of that kind: Which
being granted, no Act in it selfe can be a Crime, but must be made so
(not by the Law, but) by the successe of them that commit it; and the
same Fact be vertuous, or vicious, as Fortune pleaseth; so that what
Marius makes a Crime, Sylla shall make meritorious, and Caesar (the same
Lawes standing) turn again into a Crime, to the perpetuall disturbance
of the Peace of the Common-wealth.




False Teachers Mis-interpreting The Law Of Nature Secondly, by false
Teachers, that either mis-interpret the Law of Nature, making it thereby
repugnant to the Law Civill; or by teaching for Lawes, such Doctrines of
their own, or Traditions of former times, as are inconsistent with the
duty of a Subject.




And False Inferences From True Principles, By Teachers

Thirdly, by Erroneous Inferences from True Principles; which happens
commonly to men that are hasty, and praecipitate in concluding, and
resolving what to do; such as are they, that have both a great opinion
of their own understanding, and believe that things of this nature
require not time and study, but onely common experience, and a good
naturall wit; whereof no man thinks himselfe unprovided: whereas the
knowledge, of Right and Wrong, which is no lesse difficult, there is no
man will pretend to, without great and long study. And of those defects
in Reasoning, there is none that can Excuse (though some of them may
Extenuate) a Crime, in any man, that pretendeth to the administration of
his own private businesse; much lesse in them that undertake a publique
charge; because they pretend to the Reason, upon the want whereof they
would ground their Excuse.




By Their Passions;

Of the Passions that most frequently are the causes of Crime, one,
is Vain-glory, or a foolish over-rating of their own worth; as if
difference of worth, were an effect of their wit, or riches, or bloud,
or some other naturall quality, not depending on the Will of those that
have the Soveraign Authority. From whence proceedeth a Presumption that
the punishments ordained by the Lawes, and extended generally to all
Subjects, ought not to be inflicted on them, with the same rigour they
are inflicted on poore, obscure, and simple men, comprehended under the
name of the Vulgar.




Presumption Of Riches

Therefore it happeneth commonly, that such as value themselves by the
greatnesse of their wealth, adventure on Crimes, upon hope of escaping
punishment, by corrupting publique Justice, or obtaining Pardon by Mony,
or other rewards.




And Friends

And that such as have multitude of Potent Kindred; and popular men, that
have gained reputation amongst the Multitude, take courage to violate
the Lawes, from a hope of oppressing the Power, to whom it belongeth to
put them in execution.




Wisedome

And that such as have a great, and false opinion of their own Wisedome,
take upon them to reprehend the actions, and call in question the
Authority of them that govern, and so to unsettle the Lawes with their
publique discourse, as that nothing shall be a Crime, but what their own
designes require should be so. It happeneth also to the same men, to be
prone to all such Crimes, as consist in Craft, and in deceiving of their
Neighbours; because they think their designes are too subtile to be
perceived. These I say are effects of a false presumption of their own
Wisdome. For of them that are the first movers in the disturbance of
Common-wealth, (which can never happen without a Civill Warre,) very few
are left alive long enough, to see their new Designes established: so
that the benefit of their Crimes, redoundeth to Posterity, and such as
would least have wished it: which argues they were not as wise, as
they thought they were. And those that deceive upon hope of not being
observed, do commonly deceive themselves, (the darknesse in which they
believe they lye hidden, being nothing else but their own blindnesse;)
and are no wiser than Children, that think all hid, by hiding their own
eyes.

And generally all vain-glorious men, (unlesse they be withall timorous,)
are subject to Anger; as being more prone than others to interpret for
contempt, the ordinary liberty of conversation: And there are few Crimes
that may not be produced by Anger.




Hatred, Lust, Ambition, Covetousnesse, Causes Of Crime

As for the Passions, of Hate, Lust, Ambition, and Covetousnesse, what
Crimes they are apt to produce, is so obvious to every mans experience
and understanding, as there needeth nothing to be said of them, saving
that they are infirmities, so annexed to the nature, both of man, and
all other living creatures, as that their effects cannot be hindred,
but by extraordinary use of Reason, or a constant severity in punishing
them. For in those things men hate, they find a continuall, and
unavoydable molestation; whereby either a mans patience must be
everlasting, or he must be eased by removing the power of that which
molesteth him; The former is difficult; the later is many times
impossible, without some violation of the Law. Ambition, and
Covetousnesse are Passions also that are perpetually incumbent, and
pressing; whereas Reason is not perpetually present, to resist them:
and therefore whensoever the hope of impunity appears, their effects
proceed. And for Lust, what it wants in the lasting, it hath in the
vehemence, which sufficeth to weigh down the apprehension of all easie,
or uncertain punishments.




Fear Sometimes Cause Of Crime, As When The Danger Is Neither Present,
Nor Corporeall

Of all Passions, that which enclineth men least to break the Lawes, is
Fear. Nay, (excepting some generous natures,) it is the onely thing,
(when there is apparence of profit, or pleasure by breaking the Lawes,)
that makes men keep them. And yet in many cases a Crime may be committed
through Feare.

For not every Fear justifies the Action it produceth, but the fear onely
of corporeall hurt, which we call Bodily Fear, and from which a man
cannot see how to be delivered, but by the action. A man is assaulted,
fears present death, from which he sees not how to escape, but by
wounding him that assaulteth him; If he wound him to death, this is no
Crime; because no man is supposed at the making of a Common-wealth, to
have abandoned the defence of his life, or limbes, where the Law cannot
arrive time enough to his assistance. But to kill a man, because from
his actions, or his threatnings, I may argue he will kill me when he
can, (seeing I have time, and means to demand protection, from the
Soveraign Power,) is a Crime. Again, a man receives words of disgrace,
or some little injuries (for which they that made the Lawes, had
assigned no punishment, nor thought it worthy of a man that hath the use
of Reason, to take notice of,) and is afraid, unlesse he revenge it,
he shall fall into contempt, and consequently be obnoxious to the like
injuries from others; and to avoyd this, breaks the Law, and protects
himselfe for the future, by the terrour of his private revenge. This is
a Crime; For the hurt is not Corporeall, but Phantasticall, and (though
in this corner of the world, made sensible by a custome not many years
since begun, amongst young and vain men,) so light, as a gallant man,
and one that is assured of his own courage, cannot take notice of. Also
a man may stand in fear of Spirits, either through his own superstition,
or through too much credit given to other men, that tell him of strange
Dreams and visions; and thereby be made believe they will hurt him, for
doing, or omitting divers things, which neverthelesse, to do, or omit,
is contrary to the Lawes; And that which is so done, or omitted, is not
to be Excused by this fear; but is a Crime. For (as I have shewn before
in the second Chapter) Dreams be naturally but the fancies remaining in
sleep, after the impressions our Senses had formerly received waking;
and when men are by any accident unassured they have slept, seem to be
reall Visions; and therefore he that presumes to break the Law upon his
own, or anothers Dream, or pretended Vision, or upon other Fancy of
the power of Invisible Spirits, than is permitted by the Common-wealth,
leaveth the Law of Nature, which is a certain offence, and followeth the
imagery of his own, or another private mans brain, which he can never
know whether it signifieth any thing, or nothing, nor whether he that
tells his Dream, say true, or lye; which if every private man should
have leave to do, (as they must by the Law of Nature, if any one have
it) there could no Law be made to hold, and so all Common-wealth would
be dissolved.




Crimes Not Equall

From these different sources of Crimes, it appeares already, that all
Crimes are not (as the Stoicks of old time maintained) of the same
allay. There is place, not only for EXCUSE, by which that which seemed
a Crime, is proved to be none at all; but also for EXTENUATION, by which
the Crime, that seemed great, is made lesse. For though all Crimes doe
equally deserve the name of Injustice, as all deviation from a strait
line is equally crookednesse, which the Stoicks rightly observed; yet
it does not follow that all Crimes are equally unjust, no more than that
all crooked lines are equally crooked; which the Stoicks not observing,
held it as great a Crime, to kill a Hen, against the Law, as to kill
ones Father.




Totall Excuses

That which totally Excuseth a Fact, and takes away from it the nature of
a Crime, can be none but that, which at the same time, taketh away the
obligation of the Law. For the fact committed once against the Law,
if he that committed it be obliged to the Law, can be no other than a
Crime.

The want of means to know the Law, totally Excuseth: For the Law whereof
a man has no means to enforme himself, is not obligatory. But the want
of diligence to enquire, shall not be considered as a want of means; Nor
shall any man, that pretendeth to reason enough for the Government of
his own affairs, be supposed to want means to know the Lawes of Nature;
because they are known by the reason he pretends to: only Children, and
Madmen are Excused from offences against the Law Naturall.

Where a man is captive, or in the power of the enemy, (and he is then in
the power of the enemy, when his person, or his means of living, is
so,) if it be without his own fault, the Obligation of the Law ceaseth;
because he must obey the enemy, or dye; and consequently such obedience
is no Crime: for no man is obliged (when the protection of the Law
faileth,) not to protect himself, by the best means he can.

If a man by the terrour of present death, be compelled to doe a fact
against the Law, he is totally Excused; because no Law can oblige a
man to abandon his own preservation. And supposing such a Law were
obligatory; yet a man would reason thus, "If I doe it not, I die
presently; if I doe it, I die afterwards; therefore by doing it, there
is time of life gained;" Nature therefore compells him to the fact.

When a man is destitute of food, or other thing necessary for his life,
and cannot preserve himselfe any other way, but by some fact against
the Law; as if in a great famine he take the food by force, or stealth,
which he cannot obtaine for mony nor charity; or in defence of his life,
snatch away another mans Sword, he is totally Excused, for the reason
next before alledged.




Excuses Against The Author

Again, Facts done against the Law, by the authority of another, are
by that authority Excused against the Author; because no man ought to
accuse his own fact in another, that is but his instrument: but it
is not Excused against a third person thereby injured; because in the
violation of the law, bothe the Author, and Actor are Criminalls.
From hence it followeth that when that Man, or Assembly, that hath the
Soveraign Power, commandeth a man to do that which is contrary to a
former Law, the doing of it is totally Excused: For he ought not to
condemn it himselfe, because he is the Author; and what cannot justly
be condemned by the Soveraign, cannot justly be punished by any other.
Besides, when the Soveraign commandeth any thing to be done against
his own former Law, the Command, as to that particular fact, is an
abrogation of the Law.

If that Man, or Assembly, that hath the Soveraign Power, disclaime
any Right essentiall to the Soveraignty, whereby there accrueth to the
Subject, any liberty inconsistent with the Soveraign Power, that is to
say, with the very being of a Common-wealth, if the Subject shall refuse
to obey the Command in any thing, contrary to the liberty granted, this
is neverthelesse a Sinne, and contrary to the duty of the Subject: for
he ought to take notice of what is inconsistent with the Soveraignty,
because it was erected by his own consent, and for his own defence;
and that such liberty as is inconsistent with it, was granted through
ignorance of the evill consequence thereof. But if he not onely disobey,
but also resist a publique Minister in the execution of it, then it is
a Crime; because he might have been righted, (without any breach of the
Peace,) upon complaint.

The Degrees of Crime are taken on divers Scales, and measured, First, by
the malignity of the Source, or Cause: Secondly, by the contagion of the
Example: Thirdly, by the mischiefe of the Effect; and Fourthly, by the
concurrence of Times, Places, and Persons.




Presumption Of Power, Aggravateth

The same Fact done against the Law, if it proceed from Presumption of
strength, riches, or friends to resist those that are to execute the
Law, is a greater Crime, than if it proceed from hope of not being
discovered, or of escape by flight: For Presumption of impunity by
force, is a Root, from whence springeth, at all times, and upon all
temptations, a contempt of all Lawes; whereas in the later case, the
apprehension of danger, that makes a man fly, renders him more obedient
for the future. A Crime which we know to be so, is greater than the same
Crime proceeding from a false perswasion that it is lawfull: For he that
committeth it against his own conscience, presumeth on his force, or
other power, which encourages him to commit the same again: but he that
doth it by errour, after the errour shewn him, is conformable to the
Law.




Evill Teachers, Extenuate

Hee, whose errour proceeds from the authority of a Teacher, or an
Interpreter of the Law publiquely authorised, is not so faulty, as he
whose errour proceedeth from a peremptory pursute of his own principles,
and reasoning: For what is taught by one that teacheth by publique
Authority, the Common-wealth teacheth, and hath a resemblance of Law,
till the same Authority controuleth it; and in all Crimes that contain
not in them a denyall of the Soveraign Power, nor are against an evident
Law, Excuseth totally: whereas he that groundeth his actions, on his
private Judgement, ought according to the rectitude, or errour thereof,
to stand, or fall.




Examples Of Impunity, Extenuate

The same Fact, if it have been constantly punished in other men, as
a greater Crime, than if there have been may precedent Examples of
impunity. For those Examples, are so many hopes of Impunity given by
the Soveraign himselfe: And because he which furnishes a man with such
a hope, and presumption of mercy, as encourageth him to offend, hath his
part in the offence; he cannot reasonably charge the offender with the
whole.




Praemeditation, Aggravateth

A Crime arising from a sudden Passion, is not so great, as when the same
ariseth from long meditation: For in the former case there is a place
for Extenuation, in the common infirmity of humane nature: but he that
doth it with praemeditation, has used circumspection, and cast his eye,
on the Law, on the punishment, and on the consequence thereof to humane
society; all which in committing the Crime, hee hath contemned, and
postposed to his own appetite. But there is no suddennesse of Passion
sufficient for a totall Excuse: For all the time between the first
knowing of the Law, and the Commission of the Fact, shall be taken for
a time of deliberation; because he ought by meditation of the Law, to
rectifie the irregularity of his Passions.

Where the Law is publiquely, and with assiduity, before all the people
read, and interpreted; a fact done against it, is a greater Crime,
than where men are left without such instruction, to enquire of it with
difficulty, uncertainty, and interruption of their Callings, and
be informed by private men: for in this case, part of the fault is
discharged upon common infirmity; but in the former there is apparent
negligence, which is not without some contempt of the Soveraign Power.




Tacite Approbation Of The Soveraign, Extenuates

Those facts which the Law expresly condemneth, but the Law-maker by
other manifest signes of his will tacitly approveth, are lesse Crimes,
than the same facts, condemned both by the Law, and Lawmaker. For
seeing the will of the Law-maker is a Law, there appear in this case two
contradictory Lawes; which would totally Excuse, if men were bound to
take notice of the Soveraigns approbation, by other arguments, than are
expressed by his command. But because there are punishments consequent,
not onely to the transgression of his Law, but also to the observing
of it, he is in part a cause of the transgression, and therefore cannot
reasonably impute the whole Crime to the Delinquent. For example, the
Law condemneth Duells; the punishment is made capitall: On the contrary
part, he that refuseth Duell, is subject to contempt and scorne, without
remedy; and sometimes by the Soveraign himselfe thought unworthy to
have any charge, or preferment in Warre: If thereupon he accept Duell,
considering all men lawfully endeavour to obtain the good opinion
of them that have the Soveraign Power, he ought not in reason to be
rigorously punished; seeing part of the fault may be discharged on the
punisher; which I say, not as wishing liberty of private revenges,
or any other kind of disobedience; but a care in Governours, not
to countenance any thing obliquely, which directly they forbid. The
examples of Princes, to those that see them, are, and ever have been,
more potent to govern their actions, than the Lawes themselves. And
though it be our duty to do, not what they do, but what they say; yet
will that duty never be performed, till it please God to give men an
extraordinary, and supernaturall grace to follow that Precept.




Comparison Of Crimes From Their Effects

Again, if we compare Crimes by the mischiefe of their Effects, First,
the same fact, when it redounds to the dammage of many, is greater, than
when it redounds to the hurt of few. And therefore, when a fact hurteth,
not onely in the present, but also, (by example) in the future, it is a
greater Crime, than if it hurt onely in the present: for the former,
is a fertile Crime, and multiplyes to the hurt of many; the later is
barren. To maintain doctrines contrary to the Religion established in
the Common-wealth, is a greater fault, in an authorised Preacher, than
in a private person: So also is it, to live prophanely, incontinently,
or do any irreligious act whatsoever. Likewise in a Professor of the
Law, to maintain any point, on do any act, that tendeth to the weakning
of the Soveraign Power, as a greater Crime, than in another man: Also in
a man that hath such reputation for wisedome, as that his counsells are
followed, or his actions imitated by many, his fact against the Law, is
a greater Crime, than the same fact in another: For such men not onely
commit Crime, but teach it for Law to all other men. And generally all
Crimes are the greater, by the scandall they give; that is to say, by
becoming stumbling-blocks to the weak, that look not so much upon the
way they go in, as upon the light that other men carry before them.




Laesae Majestas

Also Facts of Hostility against the present state of the Common-wealth,
are greater Crimes, than the same acts done to private men; For
the dammage extends it selfe to all: Such are the betraying of the
strengths, or revealing of the secrets of the Common-wealth to an Enemy;
also all attempts upon the Representative of the Common-wealth, be it a
monarch, or an Assembly; and all endeavours by word, or deed to diminish
the Authority of the same, either in the present time, or in succession:
which Crimes the Latines understand by Crimina Laesae Majestatis, and
consist in designe, or act, contrary to a Fundamentall Law.




Bribery And False Testimony

Likewise those Crimes, which render Judgements of no effect, are greater
Crimes, than Injuries done to one, or a few persons; as to receive
mony to give False judgement, or testimony, is a greater Crime, than
otherwise to deceive a man of the like, or a greater summe; because not
onely he has wrong, that falls by such judgements; but all Judgements
are rendered uselesse, and occasion ministred to force, and private
revenges.




Depeculation

Also Robbery, and Depeculation of the Publique treasure, or Revenues,
is a greater Crime, than the robbing, or defrauding of a Private man;
because to robbe the publique, is to robbe many at once.




Counterfeiting Authority

Also the Counterfeit usurpation of publique Ministery, the
Counterfeiting of publique Seales, or publique Coine, than
counterfeiting of a private mans person, or his seale; because the fraud
thereof, extendeth to the dammage of many.




Crimes Against Private Men Compared

Of facts against the Law, done to private men, the greater Crime, is
that, where the dammage in the common opinion of men, is most sensible.
And therefore

To kill against the Law, is a greater Crime, that any other injury, life
preserved.

And to kill with Torment, greater, than simply to kill.

And Mutilation of a limbe, greater, than the spoyling a man of his
goods.

And the spoyling a man of his goods, by Terrour of death, or wounds,
than by clandestine surreption.

And by clandestine Surreption, than by consent fraudulently obtained.

And the violation of chastity by Force, greater, than by flattery.

And of a woman Married, than of a woman not married.

For all these things are commonly so valued; though some men are more,
and some lesse sensible of the same offence. But the Law regardeth not
the particular, but the generall inclination of mankind.

And therefore the offence men take, from contumely, in words, or
gesture, when they produce no other harme, than the present griefe of
him that is reproached, hath been neglected in the Lawes of the Greeks,
Romans, and other both antient, and moderne Common-wealths; supposing
the true cause of such griefe to consist, not in the contumely, (which
takes no hold upon men conscious of their own Vertue,) but in the
Pusillanimity of him that is offended by it.

Also a Crime against a private man, is much aggravated by the person,
time, and place. For to kill ones Parent, is a greater Crime, than to
kill another: for the Parent ought to have the honour of a Soveraign,
(though he have surrendred his Power to the Civill Law,) because he had
it originally by Nature. And to Robbe a poore man, is a greater Crime,
than to robbe a rich man; because ’tis to the poore a more sensible
dammage.

And a Crime committed in the Time, or Place appointed for Devotion, is
greater, than if committed at another time or place: for it proceeds
from a greater contempt of the Law.

Many other cases of Aggravation, and Extenuation might be added: but by
these I have set down, it is obvious to every man, to take the altitude
of any other Crime proposed.




Publique Crimes What

Lastly, because in almost all Crimes there is an Injury done, not onely
to some Private man, but also to the Common-wealth; the same Crime, when
the accusation is in the name of the Common-wealth, is called Publique
Crime; and when in the name of a Private man, a Private Crime; And the
Pleas according thereunto called Publique, Judicia Publica, Pleas of the
Crown; or Private Pleas. As in an Accusation of Murder, if the accuser
be a Private man, the plea is a Private plea; if the accuser be the
Soveraign, the plea is a Publique plea.



CHAPTER XXVIII. OF PUNISHMENTS, AND REWARDS




The Definition Of Punishment

"A PUNISHMENT, is an Evill inflicted by publique Authority, on him that
hath done, or omitted that which is Judged by the same Authority to be
a Transgression of the Law; to the end that the will of men may thereby
the better be disposed to obedience."




Right To Punish Whence Derived

Before I inferre any thing from this definition, there is a question to
be answered, of much importance; which is, by what door the Right, or
Authority of Punishing in any case, came in. For by that which has
been said before, no man is supposed bound by Covenant, not to resist
violence; and consequently it cannot be intended, that he gave any right
to another to lay violent hands upon his person. In the making of a
Common-wealth, every man giveth away the right of defending another; but
not of defending himselfe. Also he obligeth himselfe, to assist him that
hath the Soveraignty, in the Punishing of another; but of himselfe
not. But to covenant to assist the Soveraign, in doing hurt to another,
unlesse he that so covenanteth have a right to doe it himselfe, is not
to give him a Right to Punish. It is manifest therefore that the Right
which the Common-wealth (that is, he, or they that represent it) hath to
Punish, is not grounded on any concession, or gift of the Subjects.
But I have also shewed formerly, that before the Institution of
Common-wealth, every man had a right to every thing, and to do
whatsoever he thought necessary to his own preservation; subduing,
hurting, or killing any man in order thereunto. And this is the
foundation of that right of Punishing, which is exercised in every
Common-wealth. For the Subjects did not give the Soveraign that right;
but onely in laying down theirs, strengthned him to use his own, as he
should think fit, for the preservation of them all: so that it was not
given, but left to him, and to him onely; and (excepting the limits set
him by naturall Law) as entire, as in the condition of meer Nature, and
of warre of every one against his neighbour.




Private Injuries, And Revenges No Punishments

From the definition of Punishment, I inferre, First, that neither
private revenges, nor injuries of private men, can properly be stiled
Punishment; because they proceed not from publique Authority.




Nor Denyall Of Preferment

Secondly, that to be neglected, and unpreferred by the publique
favour, is not a Punishment; because no new evill is thereby on any man
Inflicted; he is onely left in the estate he was in before.




Nor Pain Inflicted Without Publique Hearing

Thirdly, that the evill inflicted by publique Authority, without
precedent publique condemnation, is not to be stiled by the name of
Punishment; but of an hostile act; because the fact for which a man
is Punished, ought first to be Judged by publique Authority, to be a
transgression of the Law.




Nor Pain Inflicted By Usurped Power

Fourthly, that the evill inflicted by usurped power, and Judges
without Authority from the Soveraign, is not Punishment; but an act of
hostility; because the acts of power usurped, have not for Author, the
person condemned; and therefore are not acts of publique Authority.




Nor Pain Inflicted Without Respect To The Future Good

Fifthly, that all evill which is inflicted without intention, or
possibility of disposing the Delinquent, or (by his example) other men,
to obey the Lawes, is not Punishment; but an act of hostility; because
without such an end, no hurt done is contained under that name.




Naturall Evill Consequences, No Punishments

Sixthly, whereas to certain actions, there be annexed by Nature, divers
hurtfull consequences; as when a man in assaulting another, is himselfe
slain, or wounded; or when he falleth into sicknesse by the doing of
some unlawfull act; such hurt, though in respect of God, who is the
author of Nature, it may be said to be inflicted, and therefore a
Punishment divine; yet it is not contaned in the name of Punishment in
respect of men, because it is not inflicted by the Authority of man.




Hurt Inflicted, If Lesse Than The Benefit Of Transgressing, Is Not
Punishment

Seventhly, If the harm inflicted be lesse than the benefit, or
contentment that naturally followeth the crime committed, that harm is
not within the definition; and is rather the Price, or Redemption, than
the Punishment of a Crime: Because it is of the nature of Punishment, to
have for end, the disposing of men to obey the Law; which end (if it
be lesse that the benefit of the transgression) it attaineth not, but
worketh a contrary effect.




Where The Punishment Is Annexed To The Law, A Greater Hurt Is Not
Punishment, But Hostility

Eighthly, If a Punishment be determined and prescribed in the Law it
selfe, and after the crime committed, there be a greater Punishment
inflicted, the excesse is not Punishment, but an act of hostility. For
seeing the aym of Punishment is not a revenge, but terrour; and the
terrour of a great Punishment unknown, is taken away by the declaration
of a lesse, the unexpected addition is no part of the Punishment.
But where there is no Punishment at all determined by the Law, there
whatsoever is inflicted, hath the nature of Punishment. For he that
goes about the violation of a Law, wherein no penalty is determined,
expecteth an indeterminate, that is to say, an arbitrary Punishment.




Hurt Inflicted For A Fact Done Before The Law, No Punishment

Ninthly, Harme inflicted for a Fact done before there was a Law that
forbad it, is not Punishment, but an act of Hostility: For before the
Law, there is no transgression of the Law: But Punishment supposeth a
fact judged, to have been a transgression of the Law; Therefore
Harme inflicted before the Law made, is not Punishment, but an act of
Hostility.




The Representative Of The Common-wealth Unpunishable

Tenthly, Hurt inflicted on the Representative of the Common-wealth, is
not Punishment, but an act of Hostility: Because it is of the nature
of Punishment, to be inflicted by publique Authority, which is the
Authority only of the Representative it self.




Hurt To Revolted Subjects Is Done By Right Of War, Not By Way Of
Punishment

Lastly, Harme inflicted upon one that is a declared enemy, fals not
under the name of Punishment: Because seeing they were either never
subject to the Law, and therefore cannot transgresse it; or having been
subject to it, and professing to be no longer so, by consequence deny
they can transgresse it, all the Harmes that can be done them, must be
taken as acts of Hostility. But in declared Hostility, all infliction of
evill is lawfull. From whence it followeth, that if a subject shall
by fact, or word, wittingly, and deliberatly deny the authority of
the Representative of the Common-wealth, (whatsoever penalty hath
been formerly ordained for Treason,) he may lawfully be made to suffer
whatsoever the Representative will: For in denying subjection, he denyes
such Punishment as by the Law hath been ordained; and therefore suffers
as an enemy of the Common-wealth; that is, according to the will of
the Representative. For the Punishments set down in the Law, are to
Subjects, not to Enemies; such as are they, that having been by their
own act Subjects, deliberately revolting, deny the Soveraign Power.

The first, and most generall distribution of Punishments, is into
Divine, and Humane. Of the former I shall have occasion, to speak, in a
more convenient place hereafter.

Humane, are those Punishments that be inflicted by the Commandement
of Man; and are either Corporall, or Pecuniary, or Ignominy, or
Imprisonment, or Exile, or mixt of these.




Punishments Corporall

Corporall Punishment is that, which is inflicted on the body directly,
and according to the intention of him that inflicteth it: such as are
stripes, or wounds, or deprivation of such pleasures of the body, as
were before lawfully enjoyed.




Capitall

And of these, some be Capitall, some Lesse than Capitall. Capitall, is
the Infliction of Death; and that either simply, or with torment. Lesse
than Capitall, are Stripes, Wounds, Chains, and any other corporall
Paine, not in its own nature mortall. For if upon the Infliction of
a Punishment death follow not in the Intention of the Inflicter, the
Punishment is not be bee esteemed Capitall, though the harme prove
mortall by an accident not to be foreseen; in which case death is not
inflicted, but hastened.

Pecuniary Punishment, is that which consisteth not only in the
deprivation of a Summe of Mony, but also of Lands, or any other goods
which are usually bought and sold for mony. And in case the Law, that
ordaineth such a punishment, be made with design to gather mony, from
such as shall transgresse the same, it is not properly a Punishment,
but the Price of priviledge, and exemption from the Law, which doth not
absolutely forbid the fact, but only to those that are not able to pay
the mony: except where the Law is Naturall, or part of Religion; for in
that case it is not an exemption from the Law, but a transgression of
it. As where a Law exacteth a Pecuniary mulct, of them that take the
name of God in vaine, the payment of the mulct, is not the price of a
dispensation to sweare, but the Punishment of the transgression of a Law
undispensable. In like manner if the Law impose a Summe of Mony to be
payd, to him that has been Injured; this is but a satisfaction for the
hurt done him; and extinguisheth the accusation of the party injured,
not the crime of the offender.




Ignominy

Ignominy, is the infliction of such Evill, as is made Dishonorable;
or the deprivation of such Good, as is made Honourable by the
Common-wealth. For there be some things Honorable by Nature; as the
effects of Courage, Magnanimity, Strength, Wisdome, and other abilities
of body and mind: Others made Honorable by the Common-wealth; as Badges,
Titles, Offices, or any other singular marke of the Soveraigns favour.
The former, (though they may faile by nature, or accident,) cannot be
taken away by a Law; and therefore the losse of them is not Punishment.
But the later, may be taken away by the publique authority that made
them Honorable, and are properly Punishments: Such are degrading men
condemned, of their Badges, Titles, and Offices; or declaring them
uncapable of the like in time to come.




Imprisonment

Imprisonment, is when a man is by publique Authority deprived of
liberty; and may happen from two divers ends; whereof one is the safe
custody of a man accused; the other is the inflicting of paine on a man
condemned. The former is not Punishment; because no man is supposed
to be Punisht, before he be Judicially heard, and declared guilty.
And therefore whatsoever hurt a man is made to suffer by bonds, or
restraint, before his cause be heard, over and above that which is
necessary to assure his custody, is against the Law of Nature. But the
Later is Punishment, because Evill, and inflicted by publique Authority,
for somewhat that has by the same Authority been Judged a Transgression
of the Law. Under this word Imprisonment, I comprehend all restraint of
motion, caused by an externall obstacle, be it a House, which is called
by the generall name of a Prison; or an Iland, as when men are said to
be confined to it; or a place where men are set to worke, as in old time
men have been condemned to Quarries, and in these times to Gallies; or
be it a Chaine, or any other such impediment.




Exile

Exile, (Banishment) is when a man is for a crime, condemned to depart
out of the dominion of the Common-wealth, or out of a certaine part
thereof; and during a prefixed time, or for ever, not to return into it:
and seemeth not in its own nature, without other circumstances, to be
a Punishment; but rather an escape, or a publique commandement to
avoid Punishment by flight. And Cicero sayes, there was never any such
Punishment ordained in the City of Rome; but cals it a refuge of men in
danger. For if a man banished, be neverthelesse permitted to enjoy
his Goods, and the Revenue of his Lands, the meer change of ayr is no
punishment; nor does it tend to that benefit of the Common-wealth, for
which all Punishments are ordained, (that is to say, to the forming of
mens wils to the observation of the Law;) but many times to the dammage
of the Common-wealth. For a Banished man, is a lawfull enemy of the
Common-wealth that banished him; as being no more a Member of the
same. But if he be withall deprived of his Lands, or Goods, then
the Punishment lyeth not in the Exile, but is to be reckoned amongst
Punishments Pecuniary.




The Punishment Of Innocent Subjects Is Contrary To The Law Of Nature

All Punishments of Innocent subjects, be they great or little, are
against the Law of Nature; For Punishment is only of Transgression of
the Law, and therefore there can be no Punishment of the Innocent. It
is therefore a violation, First, of that Law of Nature, which forbiddeth
all men, in their Revenges, to look at any thing but some future good:
For there can arrive no good to the Common-wealth, by Punishing the
Innocent. Secondly, of that, which forbiddeth Ingratitude: For seeing
all Soveraign Power, is originally given by the consent of every one of
the Subjects, to the end they should as long as they are obedient, be
protected thereby; the Punishment of the Innocent, is a rendring of
Evill for Good. And thirdly, of the Law that commandeth Equity; that
is to say, an equall distribution of Justice; which in Punishing the
Innocent is not observed.




But The Harme Done To Innocents In War, Not So

But the Infliction of what evill soever, on an Innocent man, that is not
a Subject, if it be for the benefit of the Common-wealth, and without
violation of any former Covenant, is no breach of the Law of Nature.
For all men that are not Subjects, are either Enemies, or else they have
ceased from being so, by some precedent covenants. But against Enemies,
whom the Common-wealth judgeth capable to do them hurt, it is lawfull by
the originall Right of Nature to make warre; wherein the Sword Judgeth
not, nor doth the Victor make distinction of Nocent and Innocent, as to
the time past; nor has other respect of mercy, than as it conduceth to
the good of his own People. And upon this ground it is, that also
in Subjects, who deliberatly deny the Authority of the Common-wealth
established, the vengeance is lawfully extended, not onely to the
Fathers, but also to the third and fourth generation not yet in being,
and consequently innocent of the fact, for which they are afflicted:
because the nature of this offence, consisteth in the renouncing of
subjection; which is a relapse into the condition of warre, commonly
called Rebellion; and they that so offend, suffer not as Subjects, but
as Enemies. For Rebellion, is but warre renewed.




Reward, Is Either Salary, Or Grace

REWARD, is either of Gift, or by Contract. When by Contract, it is
called Salary, and Wages; which is benefit due for service performed, or
promised. When of Gift, it is benefit proceeding from the Grace of them
that bestow it, to encourage, or enable men to do them service. And
therefore when the Soveraign of a Common-wealth appointeth a Salary
to any publique Office, he that receiveth it, is bound in Justice
to performe his office; otherwise, he is bound onely in honour, to
acknowledgement, and an endeavour of requitall. For though men have no
lawfull remedy, when they be commanded to quit their private businesse,
to serve the publique, without Reward, or Salary; yet they are not
bound thereto, by the Law of Nature, nor by the institution of the
Common-wealth, unlesse the service cannot otherwise be done; because it
is supposed the Soveraign may make use of all their means, insomuch as
the most common Souldier, may demand the wages of his warrefare, as a
debt.




Benefits Bestowed For Fear, Are Not Rewards

The benefits which a Soveraign bestoweth on a Subject, for fear of some
power, and ability he hath to do hurt to the Common-wealth, are not
properly Rewards; for they are not Salaryes; because there is in this
case no contract supposed, every man being obliged already not to do the
Common-wealth disservice: nor are they Graces; because they be extorted
by feare, which ought not to be incident to the Soveraign Power: but
are rather Sacrifices, which the Soveraign (considered in his naturall
person, and not in the person of the Common-wealth) makes, for the
appeasing the discontent of him he thinks more potent than himselfe; and
encourage not to obedience, but on the contrary, to the continuance, and
increasing of further extortion.




Salaries Certain And Casuall

And whereas some Salaries are certain, and proceed from the publique
Treasure; and others uncertain, and casuall, proceeding from the
execution of the Office for which the Salary is ordained; the later
is in some cases hurtfull to the Common-wealth; as in the case of
Judicature. For where the benefit of the Judges, and Ministers of a
Court of Justice, ariseth for the multitude of Causes that are brought
to their cognisance, there must needs follow two Inconveniences: One,
is the nourishing of sutes; for the more sutes, the greater benefit: and
another that depends on that, which is contention about Jurisdiction;
each Court drawing to it selfe, as many Causes as it can. But in
offices of Execution there are not those Inconveniences; because their
employment cannot be encreased by any endeavour of their own. And thus
much shall suffice for the nature of Punishment, and Reward; which are,
as it were, the Nerves and Tendons, that move the limbes and joynts of a
Common-wealth.

Hitherto I have set forth the nature of Man, (whose Pride and other
Passions have compelled him to submit himselfe to Government;) together
with the great power of his Governour, whom I compared to Leviathan,
taking that comparison out of the two last verses of the one and
fortieth of Job; where God having set forth the great power of
Leviathan, called him King of the Proud. "There is nothing," saith he,
"on earth, to be compared with him. He is made so as not be afraid. Hee
seeth every high thing below him; and is King of all the children of
pride." But because he is mortall, and subject to decay, as all other
Earthly creatures are; and because there is that in heaven, (though not
on earth) that he should stand in fear of, and whose Lawes he ought to
obey; I shall in the next following Chapters speak of his Diseases, and
the causes of his Mortality; and of what Lawes of Nature he is bound to
obey.



CHAPTER XXIX. OF THOSE THINGS THAT WEAKEN, OR TEND TO THE DISSOLUTION OF
A COMMON-WEALTH


Dissolution Of Common-wealths Proceedeth From Imperfect Institution

Though nothing can be immortall, which mortals make; yet, if men had the
use of reason they pretend to, their Common-wealths might be secured, at
least, from perishing by internall diseases. For by the nature of their
Institution, they are designed to live, as long as Man-kind, or as
the Lawes of Nature, or as Justice it selfe, which gives them life.
Therefore when they come to be dissolved, not by externall violence, but
intestine disorder, the fault is not in men, as they are the Matter; but
as they are the Makers, and orderers of them. For men, as they become
at last weary of irregular justling, and hewing one another, and desire
with all their hearts, to conforme themselves into one firme and lasting
edifice; so for want, both of the art of making fit Laws, to square
their actions by, and also of humility, and patience, to suffer the rude
and combersome points of their present greatnesse to be taken off, they
cannot without the help of a very able Architect, be compiled, into any
other than a crasie building, such as hardly lasting out their own time,
must assuredly fall upon the heads of their posterity.

Amongst the Infirmities therefore of a Common-wealth, I will reckon in
the first place, those that arise from an Imperfect Institution,
and resemble the diseases of a naturall body, which proceed from a
Defectuous Procreation.




Want Of Absolute Power

Of which, this is one, "That a man to obtain a Kingdome, is sometimes
content with lesse Power, than to the Peace, and defence of the
Common-wealth is necessarily required." From whence it commeth to passe,
that when the exercise of the Power layd by, is for the publique safety
to be resumed, it hath the resemblance of as unjust act; which disposeth
great numbers of men (when occasion is presented) to rebell; In the
same manner as the bodies of children, gotten by diseased parents, are
subject either to untimely death, or to purge the ill quality, derived
from their vicious conception, by breaking out into biles and scabbs.
And when Kings deny themselves some such necessary Power, it is not
alwayes (though sometimes) out of ignorance of what is necessary to the
office they undertake; but many times out of a hope to recover the same
again at their pleasure: Wherein they reason not well; because such as
will hold them to their promises, shall be maintained against them by
forraign Common-wealths; who in order to the good of their own Subjects
let slip few occasions to Weaken the estate of their Neighbours. So was
Thomas Beckett Archbishop of Canterbury, supported against Henry
the Second, by the Pope; the subjection of Ecclesiastiques to the
Common-wealth, having been dispensed with by William the Conqueror at
his reception, when he took an Oath, not to infringe the liberty of the
Church. And so were the Barons, whose power was by William Rufus (to
have their help in transferring the Succession from his Elder brother,
to himselfe,) encreased to a degree, inconsistent with the Soveraign
Power, maintained in their Rebellion against King John, by the French.
Nor does this happen in Monarchy onely. For whereas the stile of the
antient Roman Common-wealth, was, The Senate, and People of Rome;
neither Senate, nor People pretended to the whole Power; which first
caused the seditions, of Tiberius Gracchus, Caius Gracchus, Lucius
Saturnius, and others; and afterwards the warres between the Senate and
the People, under Marius and Sylla; and again under Pompey and Caesar,
to the Extinction of their Democraty, and the setting up of Monarchy.

The people of Athens bound themselves but from one onely Action; which
was, that no man on pain of death should propound the renewing of the
warre for the Island of Salamis; And yet thereby, if Solon had not
caused to be given out he was mad, and afterwards in gesture and habit
of a mad-man, and in verse, propounded it to the People that flocked
about him, they had had an enemy perpetually in readinesse, even at the
gates of their Citie; such dammage, or shifts, are all Common-wealths
forced to, that have their Power never so little limited.




Private Judgement Of Good and Evill

In the second place, I observe the Diseases of a Common-wealth, that
proceed from the poyson of seditious doctrines; whereof one is, "That
every private man is Judge of Good and Evill actions." This is true in
the condition of meer Nature, where there are no Civill Lawes; and also
under Civill Government, in such cases as are not determined by the
Law. But otherwise, it is manifest, that the measure of Good and Evill
actions, is the Civill Law; and the Judge the Legislator, who is alwayes
Representative of the Common-wealth. From this false doctrine, men are
disposed to debate with themselves, and dispute the commands of the
Common-wealth; and afterwards to obey, or disobey them, as in their
private judgements they shall think fit. Whereby the Common-wealth is
distracted and Weakened.




Erroneous Conscience

Another doctrine repugnant to Civill Society, is, that "Whatsoever a
man does against his Conscience, is Sinne;" and it dependeth on the
presumption of making himself judge of Good and Evill. For a mans
Conscience, and his Judgement is the same thing; and as the Judgement,
so also the Conscience may be erroneous. Therefore, though he that is
subject to no Civill Law, sinneth in all he does against his Conscience,
because he has no other rule to follow but his own reason; yet it is
not so with him that lives in a Common-wealth; because the Law is the
publique Conscience, by which he hath already undertaken to be guided.
Otherwise in such diversity, as there is of private Consciences, which
are but private opinions, the Common-wealth must needs be distracted,
and no man dare to obey the Soveraign Power, farther than it shall seem
good in his own eyes.




Pretence Of Inspiration

It hath been also commonly taught, "That Faith and Sanctity, are not to
be attained by Study and Reason, but by supernaturall Inspiration, or
Infusion," which granted, I see not why any man should render a reason
of his Faith; or why every Christian should not be also a Prophet; or
why any man should take the Law of his Country, rather than his own
Inspiration, for the rule of his action. And thus wee fall again into
the fault of taking upon us to Judge of Good and Evill; or to make
Judges of it, such private men as pretend to be supernaturally Inspired,
to the Dissolution of all Civill Government. Faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by those accidents, which guide us into the presence of them
that speak to us; which accidents are all contrived by God Almighty; and
yet are not supernaturall, but onely, for the great number of them that
concurre to every effect, unobservable. Faith, and Sanctity, are indeed
not very frequent; but yet they are not Miracles, but brought to passe
by education, discipline, correction, and other naturall wayes, by which
God worketh them in his elect, as such time as he thinketh fit. And
these three opinions, pernicious to Peace and Government, have in this
part of the world, proceeded chiefly from the tongues, and pens of
unlearned Divines; who joyning the words of Holy Scripture together,
otherwise than is agreeable to reason, do what they can, to make men
think, that Sanctity and Naturall Reason, cannot stand together.




Subjecting The Soveraign Power To Civill Lawes

A fourth opinion, repugnant to the nature of a Common-wealth, is this,
"That he that hath the Soveraign Power, is subject to the Civill Lawes."
It is true, that Soveraigns are all subjects to the Lawes of Nature;
because such lawes be Divine, and cannot by any man, or Common-wealth
be abrogated. But to those Lawes which the Soveraign himselfe, that is,
which the Common-wealth maketh, he is not subject. For to be subject to
Lawes, is to be subject to the Common-wealth, that is to the Soveraign
Representative, that is to himselfe; which is not subjection, but
freedome from the Lawes. Which errour, because it setteth the Lawes
above the Soveraign, setteth also a Judge above him, and a Power to
punish him; which is to make a new Soveraign; and again for the same
reason a third, to punish the second; and so continually without end, to
the Confusion, and Dissolution of the Common-wealth.




Attributing Of Absolute Propriety To The Subjects

A Fifth doctrine, that tendeth to the Dissolution of a Common-wealth,
is, "That every private man has an absolute Propriety in his Goods;
such, as excludeth the Right of the Soveraign." Every man has indeed a
Propriety that excludes the Right of every other Subject: And he has it
onely from the Soveraign Power; without the protection whereof, every
other man should have equall Right to the same. But if the Right of the
Soveraign also be excluded, he cannot performe the office they have put
him into; which is, to defend them both from forraign enemies, and
from the injuries of one another; and consequently there is no longer a
Common-wealth.

And if the Propriety of Subjects, exclude not the Right of the
Soveraign Representative to their Goods; much lesse to their offices
of Judicature, or Execution, in which they Represent the Soveraign
himselfe.




Dividing Of The Soveraign Power

There is a Sixth doctrine, plainly, and directly against the essence
of a Common-wealth; and ’tis this, "That the Soveraign Power may be
divided." For what is it to divide the Power of a Common-wealth, but
to Dissolve it; for Powers divided mutually destroy each other. And for
these doctrines, men are chiefly beholding to some of those, that making
profession of the Lawes, endeavour to make them depend upon their own
learning, and not upon the Legislative Power.




Imitation Of Neighbour Nations

And as False Doctrine, so also often-times the Example of different
Government in a neighbouring Nation, disposeth men to alteration of
the forme already setled. So the people of the Jewes were stirred up to
reject God, and to call upon the Prophet Samuel, for a King after
the manner of the Nations; So also the lesser Cities of Greece, were
continually disturbed, with seditions of the Aristocraticall, and
Democraticall factions; one part of almost every Common-wealth, desiring
to imitate the Lacedaemonians; the other, the Athenians. And I doubt
not, but many men, have been contented to see the late troubles in
England, out of an imitation of the Low Countries; supposing there
needed no more to grow rich, than to change, as they had done, the forme
of their Government. For the constitution of mans nature, is of it selfe
subject to desire novelty: When therefore they are provoked to the same,
by the neighbourhood also of those that have been enriched by it, it is
almost impossible for them, not to be content with those that solicite
them to change; and love the first beginnings, though they be grieved
with the continuance of disorder; like hot blouds, that having gotten
the itch, tear themselves with their own nayles, till they can endure
the smart no longer.




Imitation Of The Greeks, And Romans

And as to Rebellion in particular against Monarchy; one of the most
frequent causes of it, is the Reading of the books of Policy, and
Histories of the antient Greeks, and Romans; from which, young men,
and all others that are unprovided of the Antidote of solid Reason,
receiving a strong, and delightfull impression, of the great exploits
of warre, atchieved by the Conductors of their Armies, receive withall
a pleasing Idea, of all they have done besides; and imagine their great
prosperity, not to have proceeded from the aemulation of particular men,
but from the vertue of their popular form of government: Not considering
the frequent Seditions, and Civill Warres, produced by the imperfection
of their Policy. From the reading, I say, of such books, men have
undertaken to kill their Kings, because the Greek and Latine writers,
in their books, and discourses of Policy, make it lawfull, and laudable,
for any man so to do; provided before he do it, he call him Tyrant. For
they say not Regicide, that is, killing of a King, but Tyrannicide, that
is, killing of a Tyrant is lawfull. From the same books, they that live
under a Monarch conceive an opinion, that the Subjects in a Popular
Common-wealth enjoy Liberty; but that in a Monarchy they are all Slaves.
I say, they that live under a Monarchy conceive such an opinion; not
they that live under a Popular Government; for they find no such matter.
In summe, I cannot imagine, how anything can be more prejudiciall to a
Monarchy, than the allowing of such books to be publikely read, without
present applying such correctives of discreet Masters, as are fit to
take away their Venime; Which Venime I will not doubt to compare to
the biting of a mad Dogge, which is a disease the Physicians call
Hydrophobia, or Fear Of Water. For as he that is so bitten, has a
continuall torment of thirst, and yet abhorreth water; and is in such
an estate, as if the poyson endeavoured to convert him into a Dogge:
So when a Monarchy is once bitten to the quick, by those Democraticall
writers, that continually snarle at that estate; it wanteth nothing
more than a strong Monarch, which neverthelesse out of a certain
Tyrannophobia, or feare of being strongly governed, when they have him,
they abhorre.

As here have been Doctors, that hold there be three Soules in a man;
so there be also that think there may be more Soules, (that is, more
Soveraigns,) than one, in a Common-wealth; and set up a Supremacy
against the Soveraignty; Canons against Lawes; and a Ghostly Authority
against the Civill; working on mens minds, with words and distinctions,
that of themselves signifie nothing, but bewray (by their obscurity)
that there walketh (as some think invisibly) another Kingdome, as it
were a Kingdome of Fayries, in the dark. Now seeing it is manifest, that
the Civill Power, and the Power of the Common-wealth is the same
thing; and that Supremacy, and the Power of making Canons, and granting
Faculties, implyeth a Common-wealth; it followeth, that where one is
Soveraign, another Supreme; where one can make Lawes, and another
make Canons; there must needs be two Common-wealths, of one & the same
Subjects; which is a Kingdome divided in it selfe, and cannot stand. For
notwithstanding the insignificant distinction of Temporall, and Ghostly,
they are still two Kingdomes, and every Subject is subject to two
Masters. For seeing the Ghostly Power challengeth the Right to declare
what is Sinne it challengeth by consequence to declare what is Law,
(Sinne being nothing but the transgression of the Law;) and again, the
Civill Power challenging to declare what is Law, every Subject must
obey two Masters, who bothe will have their Commands be observed as Law;
which is impossible. Or, if it be but one Kingdome, either the Civill,
which is the Power of the Common-wealth, must be subordinate to the
Ghostly; or the Ghostly must be subordinate to the Temporall and then
there is no Supremacy but the Temporall. When therefore these two Powers
oppose one another, the Common-wealth cannot but be in great danger
of Civill warre, and Dissolution. For the Civill Authority being more
visible, and standing in the cleerer light of naturall reason cannot
choose but draw to it in all times a very considerable part of the
people: And the Spirituall, though it stand in the darknesse of Schoole
distinctions, and hard words; yet because the fear of Darknesse, and
Ghosts, is greater than other fears, cannot want a party sufficient to
Trouble, and sometimes to Destroy a Common-wealth. And this is a Disease
which not unfitly may be compared to the Epilepsie, or Falling-sicknesse
(which the Jewes took to be one kind of possession by Spirits) in the
Body Naturall. For as in this Disease, there is an unnaturall spirit,
or wind in the head that obstructeth the roots of the Nerves, and moving
them violently, taketh away the motion which naturally they should have
from the power of the Soule in the Brain, and thereby causeth violent,
and irregular motions (which men call Convulsions) in the parts;
insomuch as he that is seized therewith, falleth down sometimes into the
water, and sometimes into the fire, as a man deprived of his senses;
so also in the Body Politique, when the Spirituall power, moveth the
Members of a Common-wealth, by the terrour of punishments, and hope of
rewards (which are the Nerves of it,) otherwise than by the Civill Power
(which is the Soule of the Common-wealth) they ought to be moved; and by
strange, and hard words suffocates the people, and either Overwhelm
the Common-wealth with Oppression, or cast it into the Fire of a Civill
warre.




Mixt Government

Sometimes also in the meerly Civill government, there be more than
one Soule: As when the Power of levying mony, (which is the Nutritive
faculty,) has depended on a generall Assembly; the Power of conduct and
command, (which is the Motive Faculty,) on one man; and the Power of
making Lawes, (which is the Rationall faculty,) on the accidentall
consent, not onely of those two, but also of a third; This endangereth
the Common-wealth, somtimes for want of consent to good Lawes; but most
often for want of such Nourishment, as is necessary to Life, and Motion.
For although few perceive, that such government, is not government,
but division of the Common-wealth into three Factions, and call it
mixt Monarchy; yet the truth is, that it is not one independent
Common-wealth, but three independent Factions; nor one Representative
Person, but three. In the Kingdome of God, there may be three Persons
independent, without breach of unity in God that Reigneth; but where men
Reigne, that be subject to diversity of opinions, it cannot be so. And
therefore if the King bear the person of the People, and the generall
Assembly bear also the person of the People, and another assembly bear
the person of a Part of the people, they are not one Person, nor one
Soveraign, but three Persons, and three Soveraigns.

To what Disease in the Naturall Body of man, I may exactly compare this
irregularity of a Common-wealth, I know not. But I have seen a man, that
had another man growing out of his side, with an head, armes, breast,
and stomach, of his own: If he had had another man growing out of his
other side, the comparison might then have been exact.




Want Of Mony

Hitherto I have named such Diseases of a Common-wealth, as are of the
greatest, and most present danger. There be other, not so great; which
neverthelesse are not unfit to be observed. As first, the difficulty of
raising Mony, for the necessary uses of the Common-wealth; especially
in the approach of warre. This difficulty ariseth from the opinion, that
every Subject hath of a Propriety in his lands and goods, exclusive of
the Soveraigns Right to the use of the same. From whence it commeth to
passe, that the Soveraign Power, which foreseeth the necessities and
dangers of the Common-wealth, (finding the passage of mony to the
publique Treasure obstructed, by the tenacity of the people,) whereas
it ought to extend it selfe, to encounter, and prevent such dangers in
their beginnings, contracteth it selfe as long as it can, and when it
cannot longer, struggles with the people by strategems of Law, to obtain
little summes, which not sufficing, he is fain at last violently to
open the way for present supply, or Perish; and being put often to these
extremities, at last reduceth the people to their due temper; or else
the Common-wealth must perish. Insomuch as we may compare this Distemper
very aptly to an Ague; wherein, the fleshy parts being congealed, or
by venomous matter obstructed; the Veins which by their naturall course
empty themselves into the Heart, are not (as they ought to be) supplyed
from the Arteries, whereby there succeedeth at first a cold contraction,
and trembling of the limbes; and afterwards a hot, and strong endeavour
of the Heart, to force a passage for the Bloud; and before it can do
that, contenteth it selfe with the small refreshments of such things as
coole of a time, till (if Nature be strong enough) it break at last
the contumacy of the parts obstructed, and dissipateth the venome into
sweat; or (if Nature be too weak) the Patient dyeth.




Monopolies And Abuses Of Publicans

Again, there is sometimes in a Common-wealth, a Disease, which
resembleth the Pleurisie; and that is, when the Treasure of the
Common-wealth, flowing out of its due course, is gathered together in
too much abundance, in one, or a few private men, by Monopolies, or by
Farmes of the Publique Revenues; in the same manner as the Blood in a
Pleurisie, getting into the Membrane of the breast, breedeth there an
Inflammation, accompanied with a Fever, and painfull stitches.




Popular Men

Also, the Popularity of a potent Subject, (unlesse the Common-wealth
have very good caution of his fidelity,) is a dangerous Disease; because
the people (which should receive their motion from the Authority of the
Soveraign,) by the flattery, and by the reputation of an ambitious man,
are drawn away from their obedience to the Lawes, to follow a man, of
whose vertues, and designes they have no knowledge. And this is commonly
of more danger in a Popular Government, than in a Monarchy; as it may
easily be made believe, they are the People. By this means it was, that
Julius Caesar, who was set up by the People against the Senate, having
won to himselfe the affections of his Army, made himselfe Master, both
of Senate and People. And this proceeding of popular, and ambitious men,
is plain Rebellion; and may be resembled to the effects of Witchcraft.




Excessive Greatnesse Of A Town, Multitude Of Corporations

Another infirmity of a Common-wealth, is the immoderate greatnesse of a
Town, when it is able to furnish out of its own Circuit, the number, and
expence of a great Army: As also the great number of Corporations; which
are as it were many lesser Common-wealths in the bowels of a greater,
like wormes in the entrayles of a naturall man.




Liberty Of Disputing Against Soveraign Power

To which may be added, the Liberty of Disputing against absolute Power,
by pretenders to Politicall Prudence; which though bred for the most
part in the Lees of the people; yet animated by False Doctrines, are
perpetually medling with the Fundamentall Lawes, to the molestation
of the Common-wealth; like the little Wormes, which Physicians call
Ascarides.

We may further adde, the insatiable appetite, or Bulimia, of enlarging
Dominion; with the incurable Wounds thereby many times received from
the enemy; And the Wens, of ununited conquests, which are many times a
burthen, and with lesse danger lost, than kept; As also the Lethargy of
Ease, and Consumption of Riot and Vain Expence.




Dissolution Of The Common-wealth

Lastly, when in a warre (forraign, or intestine,) the enemies got a
final Victory; so as (the forces of the Common-wealth keeping the field
no longer) there is no farther protection of Subjects in their loyalty;
then is the Common-wealth DISSOLVED, and every man at liberty to protect
himselfe by such courses as his own discretion shall suggest unto him.
For the Soveraign, is the publique Soule, giving Life and Motion to the
Common-wealth; which expiring, the Members are governed by it no more,
than the Carcasse of a man, by his departed (though Immortal) Soule. For
though the Right of a Soveraign Monarch cannot be extinguished by the
act of another; yet the Obligation of the members may. For he that
wants protection, may seek it anywhere; and when he hath it, is obliged
(without fraudulent pretence of having submitted himselfe out of fear,)
to protect his Protection as long as he is able. But when the Power of
an Assembly is once suppressed, the Right of the same perisheth utterly;
because the Assembly it selfe is extinct; and consequently, there is no
possibility for the Soveraignty to re-enter.



CHAPTER XXX. OF THE OFFICE OF THE SOVERAIGN REPRESENTATIVE




The Procuration Of The Good Of The People

The OFFICE of the Soveraign, (be it a Monarch, or an Assembly,)
consisteth in the end, for which he was trusted with the Soveraign
Power, namely the procuration of the Safety Of The People; to which he
is obliged by the Law of Nature, and to render an account thereof to
God, the Author of that Law, and to none but him. But by Safety here, is
not meant a bare Preservation, but also all other Contentments of life,
which every man by lawfull Industry, without danger, or hurt to the
Common-wealth, shall acquire to himselfe.




By Instruction & Lawes

And this is intended should be done, not by care applyed to
Individualls, further than their protection from injuries, when they
shall complain; but by a generall Providence, contained in publique
Instruction, both of Doctrine, and Example; and in the making, and
executing of good Lawes, to which individuall persons may apply their
own cases.




Against The Duty Of A Soveraign To Relinquish Any Essentiall Right of
Soveraignty Or Not To See The People Taught The Grounds Of Them

And because, if the essentiall Rights of Soveraignty (specified before
in the eighteenth Chapter) be taken away, the Common-wealth is thereby
dissolved, and every man returneth into the condition, and calamity of a
warre with every other man, (which is the greatest evill that can happen
in this life;) it is the Office of the Soveraign, to maintain those
Rights entire; and consequently against his duty, First, to transferre
to another, or to lay from himselfe any of them. For he that deserteth
the Means, deserteth the Ends; and he deserteth the Means, that being
the Soveraign, acknowledgeth himselfe subject to the Civill Lawes; and
renounceth the Power of Supreme Judicature; or of making Warre, or
Peace by his own Authority; or of Judging of the Necessities of the
Common-wealth; or of levying Mony, and Souldiers, when, and as much as
in his own conscience he shall judge necessary; or of making Officers,
and Ministers both of Warre, and Peace; or of appointing Teachers, and
examining what Doctrines are conformable, or contrary to the Defence,
Peace, and Good of the people. Secondly, it is against his duty, to let
the people be ignorant, or mis-in-formed of the grounds, and reasons
of those his essentiall Rights; because thereby men are easie to be
seduced, and drawn to resist him, when the Common-wealth shall require
their use and exercise.

And the grounds of these Rights, have the rather need to be diligently,
and truly taught; because they cannot be maintained by any Civill Law,
or terrour of legal punishment. For a Civill Law, that shall forbid
Rebellion, (and such is all resistance to the essentiall Rights of
Soveraignty,) is not (as a Civill Law) any obligation, but by vertue
onely of the Law of Nature, that forbiddeth the violation of Faith;
which naturall obligation if men know not, they cannot know the Right of
any Law the Soveraign maketh. And for the Punishment, they take it
but for an act of Hostility; which when they think they have strength
enough, they will endeavour by acts of Hostility, to avoyd.




Objection Of Those That Say There Are No Principles Of Reason For
Absolute Soveraignty

As I have heard some say, that Justice is but a word, without substance;
and that whatsoever a man can by force, or art, acquire to himselfe,
(not onely in the condition of warre, but also in a Common-wealth,) is
his own, which I have already shewed to be false: So there be also
that maintain, that there are no grounds, nor Principles of Reason, to
sustain those essentiall Rights, which make Soveraignty absolute. For
if there were, they would have been found out in some place, or other;
whereas we see, there has not hitherto been any Common-wealth, where
those Rights have been acknowledged, or challenged. Wherein they argue
as ill, as if the Savage people of America, should deny there were any
grounds, or Principles of Reason, so to build a house, as to last as
long as the materials, because they never yet saw any so well built.
Time, and Industry, produce every day new knowledge. And as the art
of well building, is derived from Principles of Reason, observed by
industrious men, that had long studied the nature of materials, and
the divers effects of figure, and proportion, long after mankind
began (though poorly) to build: So, long time after men have begun to
constitute Common-wealths, imperfect, and apt to relapse into disorder,
there may, Principles of Reason be found out, by industrious meditation,
to make use of them, or be neglected by them, or not, concerneth my
particular interest, at this day, very little. But supposing that
these of mine are not such Principles of Reason; yet I am sure they are
Principles from Authority of Scripture; as I shall make it appear, when
I shall come to speak of the Kingdome of God, (administred by Moses,)
over the Jewes, his peculiar people by Covenant.




Objection From The Incapacity Of The Vulgar

But they say again, that though the Principles be right, yet Common
people are not of capacity enough to be made to understand them. I
should be glad, that the Rich, and Potent Subjects of a Kingdome, or
those that are accounted the most Learned, were no lesse incapable than
they. But all men know, that the obstructions to this kind of doctrine,
proceed not so much from the difficulty of the matter, as from the
interest of them that are to learn. Potent men, digest hardly any thing
that setteth up a Power to bridle their affections; and Learned men,
any thing that discovereth their errours, and thereby lesseneth their
Authority: whereas the Common-peoples minds, unlesse they be tainted
with dependance on the Potent, or scribbled over with the opinions
of their Doctors, are like clean paper, fit to receive whatsoever by
Publique Authority shall be imprinted in them. Shall whole Nations be
brought to Acquiesce in the great Mysteries of Christian Religion, which
are above Reason; and millions of men be made believe, that the same
Body may be in innumerable places, at one and the same time, which
is against Reason; and shall not men be able, by their teaching, and
preaching, protected by the Law, to make that received, which is so
consonant to Reason, that any unprejudicated man, needs no more to learn
it, than to hear it? I conclude therefore, that in the instruction
of the people in the Essentiall Rights (which are the Naturall, and
Fundamentall Lawes) of Soveraignty, there is no difficulty, (whilest a
Soveraign has his Power entire,) but what proceeds from his own fault,
or the fault of those whom he trusteth in the administration of the
Common-wealth; and consequently, it is his Duty, to cause them so to be
instructed; and not onely his Duty, but his Benefit also, and Security,
against the danger that may arrive to himselfe in his naturall Person,
from Rebellion.




Subjects Are To Be Taught, Not To Affect Change Of Government

And (to descend to particulars) the People are to be taught, First, that
they ought not to be in love with any forme of Government they see
in their neighbour Nations, more than with their own, nor (whatsoever
present prosperity they behold in Nations that are otherwise governed
than they,) to desire change. For the prosperity of a People ruled by
an Aristocraticall, or Democraticall assembly, commeth not from
Aristocracy, nor from Democracy, but from the Obedience, and Concord of
the Subjects; nor do the people flourish in a Monarchy, because one man
has the right to rule them, but because they obey him. Take away in
any kind of State, the Obedience, (and consequently the Concord of the
People,) and they shall not onely not flourish, but in short time be
dissolved. And they that go about by disobedience, to doe no more than
reforme the Common-wealth, shall find they do thereby destroy it; like
the foolish daughters of Peleus (in the fable;) which desiring to renew
the youth of their decrepit Father, did by the Counsell of Medea, cut
him in pieces, and boyle him, together with strange herbs, but made not
of him a new man. This desire of change, is like the breach of the first
of Gods Commandements: For there God says, Non Habebis Deos Alienos;
Thou shalt not have the Gods of other Nations; and in another place
concerning Kings, that they are Gods.




Nor Adhere (Against The Soveraign) To Popular Men

Secondly, they are to be taught, that they ought not to be led with
admiration of the vertue of any of their fellow Subjects, how
high soever he stand, nor how conspicuously soever he shine in the
Common-wealth; nor of any Assembly, (except the Soveraign Assembly,)
so as to deferre to them any obedience, or honour, appropriate to the
Soveraign onely, whom (in their particular stations) they represent; nor
to receive any influence from them, but such as is conveighed by them
from the Soveraign Authority. For that Soveraign, cannot be imagined to
love his People as he ought, that is not Jealous of them, but suffers
them by the flattery of Popular men, to be seduced from their loyalty,
as they have often been, not onely secretly, but openly, so as to
proclaime Marriage with them In Facie Ecclesiae by Preachers; and by
publishing the same in the open streets: which may fitly be compared to
the violation of the second of the ten Commandements.



Nor To Dispute The Soveraign Power

Thirdly, in consequence to this, they ought to be informed, how great
fault it is, to speak evill of the Soveraign Representative, (whether
One man, or an Assembly of men;) or to argue and dispute his Power, or
any way to use his Name irreverently, whereby he may be brought into
Contempt with his People, and their Obedience (in which the safety
of the Common-wealth consisteth) slackened. Which doctrine the third
Commandement by resemblance pointeth to.




And To Have Dayes Set Apart To Learn Their Duty

Fourthly, seeing people cannot be taught this, nor when ’tis taught,
remember it, nor after one generation past, so much as know in whom the
Soveraign Power is placed, without setting a part from their ordinary
labour, some certain times, in which they may attend those that are
appointed to instruct them; It is necessary that some such times be
determined, wherein they may assemble together, and (after prayers and
praises given to God, the Soveraign of Soveraigns) hear those their
Duties told them, and the Positive Lawes, such as generally concern them
all, read and expounded, and be put in mind of the Authority that maketh
them Lawes. To this end had the Jewes every seventh day, a Sabbath, in
which the Law was read and expounded; and in the solemnity whereof they
were put in mind, that their King was God; that having created the world
in six days, he rested the seventh day; and by their resting on it from
their labour, that that God was their King, which redeemed them from
their servile, and painfull labour in Egypt, and gave them a time, after
they had rejoyced in God, to take joy also in themselves, by lawfull
recreation. So that the first Table of the Commandements, is spent all,
in setting down the summe of Gods absolute Power; not onely as God,
but as King by pact, (in peculiar) of the Jewes; and may therefore give
light, to those that have the Soveraign Power conferred on them by the
consent of men, to see what doctrine they Ought to teach their Subjects.




And To Honour Their Parents

And because the first instruction of Children, dependeth on the care
of their Parents; it is necessary that they should be obedient to them,
whilest they are under their tuition; and not onely so, but that also
afterwards (as gratitude requireth,) they acknowledge the benefit of
their education, by externall signes of honour. To which end they are
to be taught, that originally the Father of every man was also his
Soveraign Lord, with power over him of life and death; and that the
Fathers of families, when by instituting a Common-wealth, they resigned
that absolute Power, yet it was never intended, they should lose the
honour due unto them for their education. For to relinquish such right,
was not necessary to the Institution of Soveraign Power; nor would there
be any reason, why any man should desire to have children, or take the
care to nourish, and instruct them, if they were afterwards to have no
other benefit from them, than from other men. And this accordeth with
the fifth Commandement.




And To Avoyd Doing Of Injury:

Again, every Soveraign Ought to cause Justice to be taught, which
(consisting in taking from no man what is his) is as much as to say, to
cause men to be taught not to deprive their Neighbour, by violence,
or fraud, of any thing which by the Soveraign Authority is theirs. Of
things held in propriety, those that are dearest to a man are his own
life, & limbs; and in the next degree, (in most men,) those that
concern conjugall affection; and after them riches and means of living.
Therefore the People are to be taught, to abstain from violence to
one anothers person, by private revenges; from violation of conjugall
honour; and from forcibly rapine, and fraudulent surreption of one
anothers goods. For which purpose also it is necessary they be shewed
the evill consequences of false Judgement, by corruption either of
Judges or Witnesses, whereby the distinction of propriety is taken away,
and Justice becomes of no effect: all which things are intimated in the
sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth Commandements.




And To Do All This Sincerely From The Heart

Lastly, they are to be taught, that not onely the unjust facts, but the
designes and intentions to do them, (though by accident hindred,) are
Injustice; which consisteth in the pravity of the will, as well as in
the irregularity of the act. And this is the intention of the tenth
Commandement, and the summe of the Second Table; which is reduced all to
this one Commandement of mutuall Charity, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour
as thy selfe:" as the summe of the first Table is reduced to "the love
of God;" whom they had then newly received as their King.




The Use Of Universities

As for the Means, and Conduits, by which the people may receive this
Instruction, wee are to search, by what means so may Opinions,
contrary to the peace of Man-kind, upon weak and false Principles, have
neverthelesse been so deeply rooted in them. I mean those, which I have
in the precedent Chapter specified: as That men shall Judge of what is
lawfull and unlawfull, not by the Law it selfe, but by their own
private Judgements; That Subjects sinne in obeying the Commands of the
Common-wealth, unlesse they themselves have first judged them to be
lawfull: That their Propriety in their riches is such, as to exclude the
Dominion, which the Common-wealth hath over the same: That it is lawfull
for Subjects to kill such, as they call Tyrants: That the Soveraign
Power may be divided, and the like; which come to be instilled into
the People by this means. They whom necessity, or covetousnesse keepeth
attent on their trades, and labour; and they, on the other side, whom
superfluity, or sloth carrieth after their sensuall pleasures, (which
two sorts of men take up the greatest part of Man-kind,) being diverted
from the deep meditation, which the learning of truth, not onely in the
matter of Naturall Justice, but also of all other Sciences necessarily
requireth, receive the Notions of their duty, chiefly from Divines
in the Pulpit, and partly from such of their Neighbours, or familiar
acquaintance, as having the Faculty of discoursing readily, and
plausibly, seem wiser and better learned in cases of Law, and
Conscience, than themselves. And the Divines, and such others as make
shew of Learning, derive their knowledge from the Universities, and from
the Schooles of Law, or from the Books, which by men eminent in
those Schooles, and Universities have been published. It is therefore
manifest, that the Instruction of the people, dependeth wholly, on the
right teaching of Youth in the Universities. But are not (may some men
say) the Universities of England learned enough already to do that? or
is it you will undertake to teach the Universities? Hard questions. Yet
to the first, I doubt not to answer; that till towards the later end of
Henry the Eighth, the Power of the Pope, was alwayes upheld against the
Power of the Common-wealth, principally by the Universities; and that
the doctrines maintained by so many Preachers, against the Soveraign
Power of the King, and by so many Lawyers, and others, that had their
education there, is a sufficient argument, that though the Universities
were not authors of those false doctrines, yet they knew not how to
plant the true. For in such a contradiction of Opinions, it is most
certain, that they have not been sufficiently instructed; and ’tis no
wonder, if they yet retain a relish of that subtile liquor, wherewith
they were first seasoned, against the Civill Authority. But to the later
question, it is not fit, nor needfull for me to say either I, or No: for
any man that sees what I am doing, may easily perceive what I think.

The safety of the People, requireth further, from him, or them that have
the Soveraign Power, that Justice be equally administred to all degrees
of People; that is, that as well the rich, and mighty, as poor and
obscure persons, may be righted of the injuries done them; so as the
great, may have no greater hope of impunity, when they doe violence,
dishonour, or any Injury to the meaner sort, than when one of these,
does the like to one of them: For in this consisteth Equity; to which,
as being a Precept of the Law of Nature, a Soveraign is as much subject,
as any of the meanest of his People. All breaches of the Law, are
offences against the Common-wealth: but there be some, that are also
against private Persons. Those that concern the Common-wealth onely, may
without breach of Equity be pardoned; for every man may pardon what is
done against himselfe, according to his own discretion. But an offence
against a private man, cannot in Equity be pardoned, without the consent
of him that is injured; or reasonable satisfaction.

The Inequality of Subjects, proceedeth from the Acts of Soveraign Power;
and therefore has no more place in the presence of the Soveraign; that
is to say, in a Court of Justice, then the Inequality between Kings,
and their Subjects, in the presence of the King of Kings. The honour of
great Persons, is to be valued for their beneficence, and the aydes
they give to men of inferiour rank, or not at all. And the violences,
oppressions, and injuries they do, are not extenuated, but aggravated by
the greatnesse of their persons; because they have least need to commit
them. The consequences of this partiality towards the great, proceed in
this manner. Impunity maketh Insolence; Insolence Hatred; and Hatred,
an Endeavour to pull down all oppressing and contumelious greatnesse,
though with the ruine of the Common-wealth.




Equall Taxes

To Equall Justice, appertaineth also the Equall imposition of Taxes;
the equality whereof dependeth not on the Equality of riches, but on the
Equality of the debt, that every man oweth to the Common-wealth for his
defence. It is not enough, for a man to labour for the maintenance
of his life; but also to fight, (if need be,) for the securing of his
labour. They must either do as the Jewes did after their return from
captivity, in re-edifying the Temple, build with one hand, and hold the
Sword in the other; or else they must hire others to fight for them. For
the Impositions that are layd on the People by the Soveraign Power, are
nothing else but the Wages, due to them that hold the publique Sword,
to defend private men in the exercise of severall Trades, and Callings.
Seeing then the benefit that every one receiveth thereby, is the
enjoyment of life, which is equally dear to poor, and rich; the debt
which a poor man oweth them that defend his life, is the same which a
rich man oweth for the defence of his; saving that the rich, who have
the service of the poor, may be debtors not onely for their own persons,
but for many more. Which considered, the Equality of Imposition,
consisteth rather in the Equality of that which is consumed, than of the
riches of the persons that consume the same. For what reason is there,
that he which laboureth much, and sparing the fruits of his labour,
consumeth little, should be more charged, then he that living idlely,
getteth little, and spendeth all he gets; seeing the one hath no
more protection from the Common-wealth, then the other? But when the
Impositions, are layd upon those things which men consume, every man
payeth Equally for what he useth: Nor is the Common-wealth defrauded, by
the luxurious waste of private men.




Publique Charity

And whereas many men, by accident unevitable, become unable to maintain
themselves by their labour; they ought not to be left to the Charity
of private persons; but to be provided for, (as far-forth as the
necessities of Nature require,) by the Lawes of the Common-wealth. For
as it is Uncharitablenesse in any man, to neglect the impotent; so it
is in the Soveraign of a Common-wealth, to expose them to the hazard of
such uncertain Charity.




Prevention Of Idlenesse

But for such as have strong bodies, the case is otherwise: they are to
be forced to work; and to avoyd the excuse of not finding employment,
there ought to be such Lawes, as may encourage all manner of Arts; as
Navigation, Agriculture, Fishing, and all manner of Manifacture that
requires labour. The multitude of poor, and yet strong people still
encreasing, they are to be transplanted into Countries not sufficiently
inhabited: where neverthelesse, they are not to exterminate those they
find there; but constrain them to inhabit closer together, and not range
a great deal of ground, to snatch what they find; but to court each
little Plot with art and labour, to give them their sustenance in due
season. And when all the world is overchargd with Inhabitants, then the
last remedy of all is Warre; which provideth for every man, by Victory,
or Death.




Good Lawes What

To the care of the Soveraign, belongeth the making of Good Lawes. But
what is a good Law? By a Good Law, I mean not a Just Law: for no Law can
be Unjust. The Law is made by the Soveraign Power, and all that is done
by such Power, is warranted, and owned by every one of the people; and
that which every man will have so, no man can say is unjust. It is in
the Lawes of a Common-wealth, as in the Lawes of Gaming: whatsoever
the Gamesters all agree on, is Injustice to none of them. A good Law
is that, which is Needfull, for the Good Of The People, and withall
Perspicuous.




Such As Are Necessary

For the use of Lawes, (which are but Rules Authorised) is not to bind
the People from all Voluntary actions; but to direct and keep them in
such a motion, as not to hurt themselves by their own impetuous desires,
rashnesse, or indiscretion, as Hedges are set, not to stop Travellers,
but to keep them in the way. And therefore a Law that is not Needfull,
having not the true End of a Law, is not Good. A Law may be conceived to
be Good, when it is for the benefit of the Soveraign; though it be
not Necessary for the People; but it is not so. For the good of the
Soveraign and People, cannot be separated. It is a weak Soveraign, that
has weak Subjects; and a weak People, whose Soveraign wanteth Power to
rule them at his will. Unnecessary Lawes are not good Lawes; but trapps
for Mony: which where the right of Soveraign Power is acknowledged, are
superfluous; and where it is not acknowledged, unsufficient to defend
the People.




Such As Are Perspicuous

The Perspicuity, consisteth not so much in the words of the Law it
selfe, as in a Declaration of the Causes, and Motives, for which it was
made. That is it, that shewes us the meaning of the Legislator, and the
meaning of the Legislator known, the Law is more easily understood
by few, than many words. For all words, are subject to ambiguity;
and therefore multiplication of words in the body of the Law, is
multiplication of ambiguity: Besides it seems to imply, (by too much
diligence,) that whosoever can evade the words, is without the compasse
of the Law. And this is a cause of many unnecessary Processes. For when
I consider how short were the Lawes of antient times; and how they
grew by degrees still longer; me thinks I see a contention between the
Penners, and Pleaders of the Law; the former seeking to circumscribe
the later; and the later to evade their circumscriptions; and that the
Pleaders have got the Victory. It belongeth therefore to the Office of
a Legislator, (such as is in all Common-wealths the Supreme
Representative, be it one Man, or an Assembly,) to make the reason
Perspicuous, why the Law was made; and the Body of the Law it selfe, as
short, but in as proper, and significant termes, as may be.




Punishments

It belongeth also to the Office of the Soveraign, to make a right
application of Punishments, and Rewards. And seeing the end of punishing
is not revenge, and discharge of choler; but correction, either of the
offender, or of others by his example; the severest Punishments are to
be inflicted for those Crimes, that are of most Danger to the
Publique; such as are those which proceed from malice to the Government
established; those that spring from contempt of Justice; those that
provoke Indignation in the Multitude; and those, which unpunished, seem
Authorised, as when they are committed by Sonnes, Servants, or Favorites
of men in Authority: For Indignation carrieth men, not onely against the
Actors, and Authors of Injustice; but against all Power that is likely
to protect them; as in the case of Tarquin; when for the Insolent act of
one of his Sonnes, he was driven out of Rome, and the Monarchy it selfe
dissolved. But Crimes of Infirmity; such as are those which proceed
from great provocation, from great fear, great need, or from ignorance
whether the Fact be a great Crime, or not, there is place many times for
Lenity, without prejudice to the Common-wealth; and Lenity when there is
such place for it, is required by the Law of Nature. The Punishment of
the Leaders, and teachers in a Commotion; not the poore seduced People,
when they are punished, can profit the Common-wealth by their example.
To be severe to the People, is to punish that ignorance, which may in
great part be imputed to the Soveraign, whose fault it was, they were no
better instructed.




Rewards

In like manner it belongeth to the Office, and Duty of the Soveraign,
to apply his Rewards alwayes so, as there may arise from them benefit
to the Common-wealth: wherein consisteth their Use, and End; and is then
done, when they that have well served the Common-wealth, are with
as little expence of the Common Treasure, as is possible, so well
recompenced, as others thereby may be encouraged, both to serve the same
as faithfully as they can, and to study the arts by which they may be
enabled to do it better. To buy with Mony, or Preferment, from a Popular
ambitious Subject, to be quiet, and desist from making ill impressions
in the mindes of the People, has nothing of the nature of Reward; (which
is ordained not for disservice, but for service past;) nor a signe of
Gratitude, but of Fear: nor does it tend to the Benefit, but to the
Dammage of the Publique. It is a contention with Ambition, like that of
Hercules with the Monster Hydra, which having many heads, for every one
that was vanquished, there grew up three. For in like manner, when the
stubbornnesse of one Popular man, is overcome with Reward, there arise
many more (by the Example) that do the same Mischiefe, in hope of like
Benefit: and as all sorts of Manifacture, so also Malice encreaseth by
being vendible. And though sometimes a Civill warre, may be differred,
by such wayes as that, yet the danger growes still the greater, and the
Publique ruine more assured. It is therefore against the Duty of the
Soveraign, to whom the Publique Safety is committed, to Reward those
that aspire to greatnesse by disturbing the Peace of their Country, and
not rather to oppose the beginnings of such men, with a little danger,
than after a longer time with greater.




Counsellours

Another Businesse of the Soveraign, is to choose good Counsellours;
I mean such, whose advice he is to take in the Government of the
Common-wealth. For this word Counsell, Consilium, corrupted from
Considium, is a large signification, and comprehendeth all Assemblies
of men that sit together, not onely to deliberate what is to be done
hereafter, but also to judge of Facts past, and of Law for the present.
I take it here in the first sense onely: And in this sense, there is no
choyce of Counsell, neither in a Democracy, nor Aristocracy; because the
persons Counselling are members of the person Counselled. The choyce
of Counsellours therefore is to Monarchy; In which, the Soveraign that
endeavoureth not to make choyce of those, that in every kind are the
most able, dischargeth not his Office as he ought to do. The most able
Counsellours, are they that have least hope of benefit by giving evill
Counsell, and most knowledge of those things that conduce to the Peace,
and Defence of the Common-wealth. It is a hard matter to know who
expecteth benefit from publique troubles; but the signes that guide to a
just suspicion, is the soothing of the people in their unreasonable,
or irremediable grievances, by men whose estates are not sufficient to
discharge their accustomed expences, and may easily be observed by any
one whom it concerns to know it. But to know, who has most knowledge of
the Publique affaires, is yet harder; and they that know them, need them
a great deale the lesse. For to know, who knowes the Rules almost of any
Art, is a great degree of the knowledge of the same Art; because no
man can be assured of the truth of anothers Rules, but he that is first
taught to understand them. But the best signes of Knowledge of any
Art, are, much conversing in it, and constant good effects of it. Good
Counsell comes not by Lot, nor by Inheritance; and therefore there is no
more reason to expect good Advice from the rich, or noble, in matter
of State, than in delineating the dimensions of a fortresse; unlesse we
shall think there needs no method in the study of the Politiques, (as
there does in the study of Geometry,) but onely to be lookers on; which
is not so. For the Politiques is the harder study of the two. Whereas
in these parts of Europe, it hath been taken for a Right of certain
persons, to have place in the highest Councell of State by Inheritance;
it is derived from the Conquests of the antient Germans; wherein many
absolute Lords joyning together to conquer other Nations, would not
enter in to the Confederacy, without such Priviledges, as might be
marks of difference in time following, between their Posterity, and the
posterity of their Subjects; which Priviledges being inconsistent with
the Soveraign Power, by the favour of the Soveraign, they may seem to
keep; but contending for them as their Right, they must needs by
degrees let them go, and have at last no further honour, than adhaereth
naturally to their abilities.

And how able soever be the Counsellours in any affaire, the benefit
of their Counsell is greater, when they give every one his Advice, and
reasons of it apart, than when they do it in an Assembly, by way of
Orations; and when they have praemeditated, than when they speak on the
sudden; both because they have more time, to survey the consequences
of action; and are lesse subject to be carried away to contradiction,
through Envy, Emulation, or other Passions arising from the difference
of opinion.

The best Counsell, in those things that concern not other Nations, but
onely the ease, and benefit the Subjects may enjoy, by Lawes that
look onely inward, is to be taken from the generall informations, and
complaints of the people of each Province, who are best acquainted
with their own wants, and ought therefore, when they demand nothing in
derogation of the essentiall Rights of Soveraignty, to be diligently
taken notice of. For without those Essentiall Rights, (as I have often
before said,) the Common-wealth cannot at all subsist.




Commanders

A Commander of an Army in chiefe, if he be not Popular, shall not be
beloved, nor feared as he ought to be by his Army; and consequently
cannot performe that office with good successe. He must therefore be
Industrious, Valiant, Affable, Liberall and Fortunate, that he may gain
an opinion both of sufficiency, and of loving his Souldiers. This is
Popularity, and breeds in the Souldiers both desire, and courage, to
recommend themselves to his favour; and protects the severity of
the Generall, in punishing (when need is) the Mutinous, or negligent
Souldiers. But this love of Souldiers, (if caution be not given of
the Commanders fidelity,) is a dangerous thing to Soveraign Power;
especially when it is in the hands of an Assembly not popular. It
belongeth therefore to the safety of the People, both that they be good
Conductors, and faithfull subjects, to whom the Soveraign Commits his
Armies.

But when the Soveraign himselfe is Popular, that is, reverenced and
beloved of his People, there is no danger at all from the Popularity of
a Subject. For Souldiers are never so generally unjust, as to side with
their Captain; though they love him, against their Soveraign, when they
love not onely his Person, but also his Cause. And therefore those,
who by violence have at any time suppressed the Power of their Lawfull
Soveraign, before they could settle themselves in his place, have been
alwayes put to the trouble of contriving their Titles, to save the
People from the shame of receiving them. To have a known Right to
Soveraign Power, is so popular a quality, as he that has it needs no
more, for his own part, to turn the hearts of his Subjects to him, but
that they see him able absolutely to govern his own Family: Nor, on the
part of his enemies, but a disbanding of their Armies. For the greatest
and most active part of Mankind, has never hetherto been well contented
with the present.

Concerning the Offices of one Soveraign to another, which are
comprehended in that Law, which is commonly called the Law of Nations,
I need not say any thing in this place; because the Law of Nations, and
the Law of Nature, is the same thing. And every Soveraign hath the same
Right, in procuring the safety of his People, that any particular man
can have, in procuring the safety of his own Body. And the same Law,
that dictateth to men that have no Civil Government, what they ought to
do, and what to avoyd in regard of one another, dictateth the same to
Common-wealths, that is, to the Consciences of Soveraign Princes, and
Soveraign Assemblies; there being no Court of Naturall Justice, but
in the Conscience onely; where not Man, but God raigneth; whose Lawes,
(such of them as oblige all Mankind,) in respect of God, as he is the
Author of Nature, are Naturall; and in respect of the same God, as he is
King of Kings, are Lawes. But of the Kingdome of God, as King of Kings,
and as King also of a peculiar People, I shall speak in the rest of this
discourse.



CHAPTER XXXI. OF THE KINGDOME OF GOD BY NATURE




The Scope Of The Following Chapters

That the condition of meer Nature, that is to say, of absolute Liberty,
such as is theirs, that neither are Soveraigns, nor Subjects, is
Anarchy, and the condition of Warre: That the Praecepts, by which men
are guided to avoyd that condition, are the Lawes of Nature: That
a Common-wealth, without Soveraign Power, is but a word, without
substance, and cannot stand: That Subjects owe to Soveraigns, simple
Obedience, in all things, wherein their obedience is not repugnant
to the Lawes of God, I have sufficiently proved, in that which I have
already written. There wants onely, for the entire knowledge of Civill
duty, to know what are those Lawes of God. For without that, a man knows
not, when he is commanded any thing by the Civill Power, whether it be
contrary to the Law of God, or not: and so, either by too much civill
obedience, offends the Divine Majesty, or through feare of offending
God, transgresses the commandements of the Common-wealth. To avoyd both
these Rocks, it is necessary to know what are the Lawes Divine. And
seeing the knowledge of all Law, dependeth on the knowledge of the
Soveraign Power; I shall say something in that which followeth, of the
KINGDOME OF GOD.




Who Are Subjects In The Kingdome Of God

"God is King, let the Earth rejoice," saith the Psalmist. (Psal. 96. 1).
And again, "God is King though the Nations be angry; and he that sitteth
on the Cherubins, though the earth be moved." (Psal. 98. 1). Whether
men will or not, they must be subject alwayes to the Divine Power. By
denying the Existence, or Providence of God, men may shake off their
Ease, but not their Yoke. But to call this Power of God, which extendeth
it selfe not onely to Man, but also to Beasts, and Plants, and Bodies
inanimate, by the name of Kingdome, is but a metaphoricall use of
the word. For he onely is properly said to Raigne, that governs his
Subjects, by his Word, and by promise of Rewards to those that obey
it, and by threatning them with Punishment that obey it not. Subjects
therefore in the Kingdome of God, are not Bodies Inanimate, nor
creatures Irrationall; because they understand no Precepts as his: Nor
Atheists; nor they that believe not that God has any care of the actions
of mankind; because they acknowledge no Word for his, nor have hope of
his rewards, or fear of his threatnings. They therefore that believe
there is a God that governeth the world, and hath given Praecepts, and
propounded Rewards, and Punishments to Mankind, are Gods Subjects; all
the rest, are to be understood as Enemies.




A Threefold Word Of God, Reason, Revelation, Prophecy

To rule by Words, requires that such Words be manifestly made known;
for else they are no Lawes: For to the nature of Lawes belongeth a
sufficient, and clear Promulgation, such as may take away the excuse of
Ignorance; which in the Lawes of men is but of one onely kind, and that
is, Proclamation, or Promulgation by the voyce of man. But God
declareth his Lawes three wayes; by the Dictates of Naturall Reason, By
Revelation, and by the Voyce of some Man, to whom by the operation of
Miracles, he procureth credit with the rest. From hence there ariseth
a triple Word of God, Rational, Sensible, and Prophetique: to which
Correspondeth a triple Hearing; Right Reason, Sense Supernaturall, and
Faith. As for Sense Supernaturall, which consisteth in Revelation, or
Inspiration, there have not been any Universall Lawes so given, because
God speaketh not in that manner, but to particular persons, and to
divers men divers things.

A Twofold Kingdome Of God, Naturall And Prophetique From the difference
between the other two kinds of Gods Word, Rationall, and Prophetique,
there may be attributed to God, a two-fold Kingdome, Naturall, and
Prophetique: Naturall, wherein he governeth as many of Mankind as
acknowledge his Providence, by the naturall Dictates of Right Reason;
And Prophetique, wherein having chosen out one peculiar Nation (the
Jewes) for his Subjects, he governed them, and none but them, not onely
by naturall Reason, but by Positive Lawes, which he gave them by the
mouths of his holy Prophets. Of the Naturall Kingdome of God I intend to
speak in this Chapter.

The Right Of Gods Soveraignty Is Derived From His Omnipotence The Right
of Nature, whereby God reigneth over men, and punisheth those that
break his Lawes, is to be derived, not from his Creating them, as if
he required obedience, as of Gratitude for his benefits; but from his
Irresistible Power. I have formerly shewn, how the Soveraign Right
ariseth from Pact: To shew how the same Right may arise from Nature,
requires no more, but to shew in what case it is never taken away.
Seeing all men by Nature had Right to All things, they had Right every
one to reigne over all the rest. But because this Right could not be
obtained by force, it concerned the safety of every one, laying by that
Right, to set up men (with Soveraign Authority) by common consent,
to rule and defend them: whereas if there had been any man of Power
Irresistible; there had been no reason, why he should not by that Power
have ruled, and defended both himselfe, and them, according to his own
discretion. To those therefore whose Power is irresistible, the dominion
of all men adhaereth naturally by their excellence of Power; and
consequently it is from that Power, that the Kingdome over men, and
the Right of afflicting men at his pleasure, belongeth Naturally to God
Almighty; not as Creator, and Gracious; but as Omnipotent. And though
Punishment be due for Sinne onely, because by that word is understood
Affliction for Sinne; yet the Right of Afflicting, is not alwayes
derived from mens Sinne, but from Gods Power.




Sinne Not The Cause Of All Affliction

This question, "Why Evill men often Prosper, and Good men suffer
Adversity," has been much disputed by the Antient, and is the same
with this of ours, "By what Right God dispenseth the Prosperities and
Adversities of this life;" and is of that difficulty, as it hath shaken
the faith, not onely of the Vulgar, but of Philosophers, and which is
more, of the Saints, concerning the Divine Providence. "How Good," saith
David, "is the God of Israel to those that are Upright in Heart; and yet
my feet were almost gone, my treadings had well-nigh slipt; for I was
grieved at the Wicked, when I saw the Ungodly in such Prosperity."
And Job, how earnestly does he expostulate with God, for the many
Afflictions he suffered, notwithstanding his Righteousnesse? This
question in the case of Job, is decided by God himselfe, not by
arguments derived from Job’s Sinne, but his own Power. For whereas the
friends of Job drew their arguments from his Affliction to his Sinne,
and he defended himselfe by the conscience of his Innocence, God
himselfe taketh up the matter, and having justified the Affliction by
arguments drawn from his Power, such as this "Where was thou when I
layd the foundations of the earth," and the like, both approved
Job’s Innocence, and reproved the Erroneous doctrine of his friends.
Conformable to this doctrine is the sentence of our Saviour, concerning
the man that was born Blind, in these words, "Neither hath this man
sinned, nor his fathers; but that the works of God might be made
manifest in him." And though it be said "That Death entred into the
world by sinne," (by which is meant that if Adam had never sinned, he had
never dyed, that is, never suffered any separation of his soule from his
body,) it follows not thence, that God could not justly have Afflicted
him, though he had not Sinned, as well as he afflicteth other living
creatures, that cannot sinne.




Divine Lawes

Having spoken of the Right of Gods Soveraignty, as grounded onely on
Nature; we are to consider next, what are the Divine Lawes, or Dictates
of Naturall Reason; which Lawes concern either the naturall Duties of
one man to another, or the Honour naturally due to our Divine Soveraign.
The first are the same Lawes of Nature, of which I have spoken already
in the 14. and 15. Chapters of this Treatise; namely, Equity, Justice,
Mercy, Humility, and the rest of the Morall Vertues. It remaineth
therefore that we consider, what Praecepts are dictated to men, by their
Naturall Reason onely, without other word of God, touching the Honour
and Worship of the Divine Majesty.




Honour And Worship What

Honour consisteth in the inward thought, and opinion of the Power, and
Goodnesse of another: and therefore to Honour God, is to think as Highly
of his Power and Goodnesse, as is possible. And of that opinion, the
externall signes appearing in the Words, and Actions of men, are called
Worship; which is one part of that which the Latines understand by the
word Cultus: For Cultus signifieth properly, and constantly, that labour
which a man bestowes on any thing, with a purpose to make benefit by it.
Now those things whereof we make benefit, are either subject to us, and
the profit they yeeld, followeth the labour we bestow upon them, as a
naturall effect; or they are not subject to us, but answer our labour,
according to their own Wills. In the first sense the labour bestowed on
the Earth, is called Culture; and the education of Children a Culture of
their mindes. In the second sense, where mens wills are to be wrought to
our purpose, not by Force, but by Compleasance, it signifieth as much as
Courting, that is, a winning of favour by good offices; as by praises,
by acknowledging their Power, and by whatsoever is pleasing to them from
whom we look for any benefit. And this is properly Worship: in which
sense Publicola, is understood for a Worshipper of the People, and
Cultus Dei, for the Worship of God.




Severall Signes Of Honour

From internall Honour, consisting in the opinion of Power and Goodnesse,
arise three Passions; Love, which hath reference to Goodnesse; and Hope,
and Fear, that relate to Power: And three parts of externall worship;
Praise, Magnifying, and Blessing: The subject of Praise, being
Goodnesse; the subject of Magnifying, and Blessing, being Power, and the
effect thereof Felicity. Praise, and Magnifying are significant both by
Words, and Actions: By Words, when we say a man is Good, or Great:
By Actions, when we thank him for his Bounty, and obey his Power. The
opinion of the Happinesse of another, can onely be expressed by words.




Worship Naturall And Arbitrary

There be some signes of Honour, (both in Attributes and Actions,) that
be Naturally so; as amongst Attributes, Good, Just, Liberall, and the
like; and amongst Actions, Prayers, Thanks, and Obedience. Others are
so by Institution, or Custome of men; and in some times and places are
Honourable; in others Dishonourable; in others Indifferent: such as are
the Gestures in Salutation, Prayer, and Thanksgiving, in different
times and places, differently used. The former is Naturall; the later
Arbitrary Worship.




Worship Commanded And Free

And of Arbitrary Worship, there bee two differences: For sometimes it is
a Commanded, sometimes Voluntary Worship: Commanded, when it is such
as hee requireth, who is Worshipped: Free, when it is such as the
Worshipper thinks fit. When it is Commanded, not the words, or gestures,
but the obedience is the Worship. But when Free, the Worship consists
in the opinion of the beholders: for if to them the words, or actions by
which we intend honour, seem ridiculous, and tending to contumely; they
are not Worship; because a signe is not a signe to him that giveth it,
but to him to whom it is made; that is, to the spectator.




Worship Publique And Private

Again, there is a Publique, and a Private Worship. Publique, is the
Worship that a Common-wealth performeth, as one Person. Private, is that
which a Private person exhibiteth. Publique, in respect of the whole
Common-wealth, is Free; but in respect of Particular men it is not so.
Private, is in secret Free; but in the sight of the multitude, it is
never without some Restraint, either from the Lawes, or from the Opinion
of men; which is contrary to the nature of Liberty.




The End Of Worship

The End of Worship amongst men, is Power. For where a man seeth another
worshipped he supposeth him powerfull, and is the readier to obey him;
which makes his Power greater. But God has no Ends: the worship we do
him, proceeds from our duty, and is directed according to our capacity,
by those rules of Honour, that Reason dictateth to be done by the weak
to the more potent men, in hope of benefit, for fear of dammage, or in
thankfulnesse for good already received from them.




Attributes Of Divine Honour

That we may know what worship of God is taught us by the light of
Nature, I will begin with his Attributes. Where, First, it is manifest,
we ought to attribute to him Existence: For no man can have the will to
honour that, which he thinks not to have any Beeing.

Secondly, that those Philosophers, who sayd the World, or the Soule of
the World was God, spake unworthily of him; and denyed his Existence:
For by God, is understood the cause of the World; and to say the World
is God, is to say there is no cause of it, that is, no God.

Thirdly, to say the World was not Created, but Eternall, (seeing that
which is Eternall has no cause,) is to deny there is a God.

Fourthly, that they who attributing (as they think) Ease to God, take
from him the care of Mankind; take from him his Honour: for it takes
away mens love, and fear of him; which is the root of Honour.

Fifthly, in those things that signifie Greatnesse, and Power; to say he
is Finite, is not to Honour him: For it is not a signe of the Will to
Honour God, to attribute to him lesse than we can; and Finite, is lesse
than we can; because to Finite, it is easie to adde more.

Therefore to attribute Figure to him, is not Honour; for all Figure is
Finite:

Nor to say we conceive, and imagine, or have an Idea of him, in our
mind: for whatsoever we conceive is Finite:

Not to attribute to him Parts, or Totality; which are the Attributes
onely of things Finite:

Nor to say he is this, or that Place: for whatsoever is in Place, is
bounded, and Finite:

Nor that he is Moved, or Resteth: for both these Attributes ascribe to
him Place:

Nor that there be more Gods than one; because it implies them all
Finite: for there cannot be more than one Infinite: Nor to ascribe to
him (unlesse Metaphorically, meaning not the Passion, but the Effect)
Passions that partake of Griefe; as Repentance, Anger, Mercy: or of
Want; as Appetite, Hope, Desire; or of any Passive faculty: For Passion,
is Power limited by somewhat else.

And therefore when we ascribe to God a Will, it is not to be understood,
as that of Man, for a Rationall Appetite; but as the Power, by which he
effecteth every thing.

Likewise when we attribute to him Sight, and other acts of Sense; as
also Knowledge, and Understanding; which in us is nothing else, but
a tumult of the mind, raised by externall things that presse the
organicall parts of mans body: For there is no such thing in God; and
being things that depend on naturall causes, cannot be attributed to
him.

Hee that will attribute to God, nothing but what is warranted by
naturall Reason, must either use such Negative Attributes, as Infinite,
Eternall, Incomprehensible; or Superlatives, as Most High, Most Great,
and the like; or Indefinite, as Good, Just, Holy, Creator; and in such
sense, as if he meant not to declare what he is, (for that were to
circumscribe him within the limits of our Fancy,) but how much wee
admire him, and how ready we would be to obey him; which is a signe of
Humility, and of a Will to honour him as much as we can: For there is
but one Name to signifie our Conception of his Nature, and that is, I
AM: and but one Name of his Relation to us, and that is God; in which is
contained Father, King, and Lord.




Actions That Are Signes Of Divine Honour

Concerning the actions of Divine Worship, it is a most generall Precept
of Reason, that they be signes of the Intention to Honour God; such as
are, First, Prayers: For not the Carvers, when they made Images, were
thought to make them Gods; but the People that Prayed to them.

Secondly, Thanksgiving; which differeth from Prayer in Divine Worship,
no otherwise, than that Prayers precede, and Thanks succeed the benefit;
the end both of the one, and the other, being to acknowledge God, for
Author of all benefits, as well past, as future.

Thirdly, Gifts; that is to say, Sacrifices, and Oblations, (if they be
of the best,) are signes of Honour: for they are Thanksgivings.

Fourthly, Not to swear by any but God, is naturally a signe of Honour:
for it is a confession that God onely knoweth the heart; and that no
mans wit, or strength can protect a man against Gods vengence on the
perjured.

Fifthly, it is a part of Rationall Worship, to speak Considerately
of God; for it argues a Fear of him, and Fear, is a confession of his
Power. Hence followeth, That the name of God is not to be used rashly,
and to no purpose; for that is as much, as in Vain: And it is to
no purpose; unlesse it be by way of Oath, and by order of the
Common-wealth, to make Judgements certain; or between Common-wealths,
to avoyd Warre. And that disputing of Gods nature is contrary to his
Honour: For it is supposed, that in this naturall Kingdome of God, there
is no other way to know any thing, but by naturall Reason; that is, from
the Principles of naturall Science; which are so farre from teaching us
any thing of Gods nature, as they cannot teach us our own nature, nor
the nature of the smallest creature living. And therefore, when men out
of the Principles of naturall Reason, dispute of the Attributes of God,
they but dishonour him: For in the Attributes which we give to God, we
are not to consider the signification of Philosophicall Truth; but the
signification of Pious Intention, to do him the greatest Honour we are
able. From the want of which consideration, have proceeded the volumes
of disputation about the Nature of God, that tend not to his Honour, but
to the honour of our own wits, and learning; and are nothing else but
inconsiderate, and vain abuses of his Sacred Name.

Sixthly, in Prayers, Thanksgivings, Offerings and Sacrifices, it is a
Dictate of naturall Reason, that they be every one in his kind the
best, and most significant of Honour. As for example, that Prayers, and
Thanksgiving, be made in Words and Phrases, not sudden, nor light, nor
Plebeian; but beautifull and well composed; For else we do not God
as much honour as we can. And therefore the Heathens did absurdly, to
worship Images for Gods: But their doing it in Verse, and with Musick,
both of Voyce, and Instruments, was reasonable. Also that the Beasts
they offered in sacrifice, and the Gifts they offered, and their actions
in Worshipping, were full of submission, and commemorative of benefits
received, was according to reason, as proceeding from an intention to
honour him.

Seventhly, Reason directeth not onely to worship God in Secret; but
also, and especially, in Publique, and in the sight of men: For without
that, (that which in honour is most acceptable) the procuring others to
honour him, is lost.

Lastly, Obedience to his Lawes (that is, in this case to the Lawes
of Nature,) is the greatest worship of all. For as Obedience is
more acceptable to God than sacrifice; so also to set light by his
Commandements, is the greatest of all contumelies. And these are the
Lawes of that Divine Worship, which naturall Reason dictateth to private
men.




Publique Worship Consisteth In Uniformity

But seeing a Common-wealth is but one Person, it ought also to exhibite
to God but one Worship; which then it doth, when it commandeth it to be
exhibited by Private men, Publiquely. And this is Publique Worship; the
property whereof, is to be Uniforme: For those actions that are done
differently, by different men, cannot be said to be a Publique Worship.
And therefore, where many sorts of Worship be allowed, proceeding from
the different Religions of Private men, it cannot be said there is any
Publique Worship, nor that the Common-wealth is of any Religion at all.




All Attributes Depend On The Lawes Civill

And because words (and consequently the Attributes of God) have their
signification by agreement, and constitution of men; those Attributes
are to be held significative of Honour, that men intend shall so be; and
whatsoever may be done by the wills of particular men, where there is no
Law but Reason, may be done by the will of the Common-wealth, by Lawes
Civill. And because a Common-wealth hath no Will, nor makes no Lawes,
but those that are made by the Will of him, or them that have the
Soveraign Power; it followeth, that those Attributes which the Soveraign
ordaineth, in the Worship of God, for signes of Honour, ought to be
taken and used for such, by private men in their publique Worship.




Not All Actions

But because not all Actions are signes by Constitution; but some are
Naturally signes of Honour, others of Contumely, these later (which are
those that men are ashamed to do in the sight of them they reverence)
cannot be made by humane power a part of Divine worship; nor the former
(such as are decent, modest, humble Behaviour) ever be separated from
it. But whereas there be an infinite number of Actions, and Gestures, of
an indifferent nature; such of them as the Common-wealth shall ordain to
be Publiquely and Universally in use, as signes of Honour, and part of
Gods Worship, are to be taken and used for such by the Subjects. And
that which is said in the Scripture, "It is better to obey God than
men," hath place in the kingdome of God by Pact, and not by Nature.




Naturall Punishments

Having thus briefly spoken of the Naturall Kingdome of God, and his
Naturall Lawes, I will adde onely to this Chapter a short declaration of
his Naturall Punishments. There is no action of man in this life, that
is not the beginning of so long a chayn of Consequences, as no humane
Providence, is high enough, to give a man a prospect to the end. And
in this Chayn, there are linked together both pleasing and unpleasing
events; in such manner, as he that will do any thing for his pleasure,
must engage himselfe to suffer all the pains annexed to it; and these
pains, are the Naturall Punishments of those actions, which are the
beginning of more Harme that Good. And hereby it comes to passe, that
Intemperance, is naturally punished with Diseases; Rashnesse, with
Mischances; Injustice, with the Violence of Enemies; Pride, with Ruine;
Cowardise, with Oppression; Negligent government of Princes, with
Rebellion; and Rebellion, with Slaughter. For seeing Punishments
are consequent to the breach of Lawes; Naturall Punishments must be
naturally consequent to the breach of the Lawes of Nature; and therfore
follow them as their naturall, not arbitrary effects.




The Conclusion Of The Second Part

And thus farre concerning the Constitution, Nature, and Right of
Soveraigns; and concerning the Duty of Subjects, derived from the
Principles of Naturall Reason. And now, considering how different
this Doctrine is, from the Practise of the greatest part of the world,
especially of these Western parts, that have received their Morall
learning from Rome, and Athens; and how much depth of Morall Philosophy
is required, in them that have the Administration of the Soveraign
Power; I am at the point of believing this my labour, as uselesse,
and the Common-wealth of Plato; For he also is of opinion that it is
impossible for the disorders of State, and change of Governments by
Civill Warre, ever to be taken away, till Soveraigns be Philosophers.
But when I consider again, that the Science of Naturall Justice, is the
onely Science necessary for Soveraigns, and their principall Ministers;
and that they need not be charged with the Sciences Mathematicall, (as
by Plato they are,) further, than by good Lawes to encourage men to
the study of them; and that neither Plato, nor any other Philosopher
hitherto, hath put into order, and sufficiently, or probably proved all
the Theoremes of Morall doctrine, that men may learn thereby, both how
to govern, and how to obey; I recover some hope, that one time or other,
this writing of mine, may fall into the hands of a Soveraign, who will
consider it himselfe, (for it is short, and I think clear,) without the
help of any interested, or envious Interpreter; and by the exercise of
entire Soveraignty, in protecting the Publique teaching of it, convert
this Truth of Speculation, into the Utility of Practice.





PART III.
OF A CHRISTIAN COMMON-WEALTH




CHAPTER XXXII. OF THE PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN POLITIQUES


The Word Of God Delivered By Prophets Is The Main Principle

Of Christian Politiques

I have derived the Rights of Soveraigne Power, and the duty of Subjects
hitherto, from the Principles of Nature onely; such as Experience has
found true, or Consent (concerning the use of words) has made so; that
is to say, from the nature of Men, known to us by Experience, and
from Definitions (of such words as are Essentiall to all Politicall
reasoning) universally agreed on. But in that I am next to handle, which
is the Nature and Rights of a CHRISTIAN COMMON-WEALTH, whereof there
dependeth much upon Supernaturall Revelations of the Will of God; the
ground of my Discourse must be, not only the Naturall Word of God, but
also the Propheticall.

Neverthelesse, we are not to renounce our Senses, and Experience; nor
(that which is the undoubted Word of God) our naturall Reason. For they
are the talents which he hath put into our hands to negotiate, till the
coming again of our blessed Saviour; and therefore not to be folded up
in the Napkin of an Implicate Faith, but employed in the purchase of
Justice, Peace, and true Religion, For though there be many things in
Gods Word above Reason; that is to say, which cannot by naturall reason
be either demonstrated, or confuted; yet there is nothing contrary
to it; but when it seemeth so, the fault is either in our unskilfull
Interpretation, or erroneous Ratiocination.

Therefore, when any thing therein written is too hard for our
examination, wee are bidden to captivate our understanding to the Words;
and not to labour in sifting out a Philosophicall truth by Logick, of
such mysteries as are not comprehensible, nor fall under any rule of
naturall science. For it is with the mysteries of our Religion, as with
wholsome pills for the sick, which swallowed whole, have the vertue to
cure; but chewed, are for the most part cast up again without effect.




What It Is To Captivate The Understanding

But by the Captivity of our Understanding, is not meant a Submission of
the Intellectual faculty, to the Opinion of any other man; but of
the Will to Obedience, where obedience is due. For Sense, Memory,
Understanding, Reason, and Opinion are not in our power to change; but
alwaies, and necessarily such, as the things we see, hear, and consider
suggest unto us; and therefore are not effects of our Will, but our Will
of them. We then Captivate our Understanding and Reason, when we forbear
contradiction; when we so speak, as (by lawfull Authority) we are
commanded; and when we live accordingly; which in sum, is Trust, and
Faith reposed in him that speaketh, though the mind be incapable of any
Notion at all from the words spoken.




How God Speaketh To Men

When God speaketh to man, it must be either immediately; or by mediation
of another man, to whom he had formerly spoken by himself immediately.
How God speaketh to a man immediately, may be understood by those well
enough, to whom he hath so spoken; but how the same should be understood
by another, is hard, if not impossible to know. For if a man pretend to
me, that God hath spoken to him supernaturally, and immediately, and I
make doubt of it, I cannot easily perceive what argument he can produce,
to oblige me to beleeve it. It is true, that if he be my Soveraign,
he may oblige me to obedience, so, as not by act or word to declare I
beleeve him not; but not to think any otherwise then my reason perswades
me. But if one that hath not such authority over me, shall pretend the
same, there is nothing that exacteth either beleefe, or obedience.

For to say that God hath spoken to him in the Holy Scripture, is not
to say God hath spoken to him immediately, but by mediation of the
Prophets, or of the Apostles, or of the Church, in such manner as he
speaks to all other Christian men. To say he hath spoken to him in a
Dream, is no more than to say he dreamed that God spake to him; which is
not of force to win beleef from any man, that knows dreams are for
the most part naturall, and may proceed from former thoughts; and such
dreams as that, from selfe conceit, and foolish arrogance, and false
opinion of a mans own godlinesse, or other vertue, by which he thinks he
hath merited the favour of extraordinary Revelation. To say he hath
seen a Vision, or heard a Voice, is to say, that he hath dreamed between
sleeping and waking: for in such manner a man doth many times naturally
take his dream for a vision, as not having well observed his own
slumbering. To say he speaks by supernaturall Inspiration, is to say he
finds an ardent desire to speak, or some strong opinion of himself, for
which he can alledge no naturall and sufficient reason. So that
though God Almighty can speak to a man, by Dreams, Visions, Voice, and
Inspiration; yet he obliges no man to beleeve he hath so done to him
that pretends it; who (being a man), may erre, and (which is more) may
lie.




By What Marks Prophets Are Known

How then can he, to whom God hath never revealed his Wil immediately
(saving by the way of natural reason) know when he is to obey, or not
to obey his Word, delivered by him, that sayes he is a Prophet? (1 Kings
22) Of 400 Prophets, of whom the K. of Israel asked counsel, concerning
the warre he made against Ramoth Gilead, only Micaiah was a true one.(1
Kings 13) The Prophet that was sent to prophecy against the Altar set up
by Jeroboam, though a true Prophet, and that by two miracles done in
his presence appears to be a Prophet sent from God, was yet deceived by
another old Prophet, that perswaded him as from the mouth of God, to eat
and drink with him. If one Prophet deceive another, what certainty is
there of knowing the will of God, by other way than that of Reason? To
which I answer out of the Holy Scripture, that there be two marks, by
which together, not asunder, a true Prophet is to be known. One is the
doing of miracles; the other is the not teaching any other Religion than
that which is already established. Asunder (I say) neither of these is
sufficient. (Deut. 13 v. 1,2,3,4,5 ) "If a Prophet rise amongst you, or
a Dreamer of dreams, and shall pretend the doing of a miracle, and the
miracle come to passe; if he say, Let us follow strange Gods, which thou
hast not known, thou shalt not hearken to him, &c. But that Prophet and
Dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, because he hath spoken to you
to Revolt from the Lord your God." In which words two things are to
be observed, First, that God wil not have miracles alone serve for
arguments, to approve the Prophets calling; but (as it is in the third
verse) for an experiment of the constancy of our adherence to himself.
For the works of the Egyptian Sorcerers, though not so great as those
of Moses, yet were great miracles. Secondly, that how great soever the
miracle be, yet if it tend to stir up revolt against the King, or him
that governeth by the Kings authority, he that doth such miracle, is
not to be considered otherwise than as sent to make triall of their
allegiance. For these words, "revolt from the Lord your God," are in
this place equivalent to "revolt from your King." For they had made God
their King by pact at the foot of Mount Sinai; who ruled them by Moses
only; for he only spake with God, and from time to time declared Gods
Commandements to the people. In like manner, after our Saviour Christ
had made his Disciples acknowledge him for the Messiah, (that is to say,
for Gods anointed, whom the nation of the Jews daily expected for their
King, but refused when he came,) he omitted not to advertise them of the
danger of miracles. "There shall arise," (saith he) "false Christs, and
false Prophets, and shall doe great wonders and miracles, even to the
seducing (if it were possible) of the very Elect." (Mat. 24. 24) By
which it appears, that false Prophets may have the power of miracles;
yet are wee not to take their doctrin for Gods Word. St. Paul says
further to the Galatians, that "if himself, or an Angell from heaven
preach another Gospel to them, than he had preached, let him be
accursed." (Gal. 1. 8) That Gospel was, that Christ was King; so that
all preaching against the power of the King received, in consequence
to these words, is by St. Paul accursed. For his speech is addressed to
those, who by his preaching had already received Jesus for the Christ,
that is to say, for King of the Jews.




The Marks Of A Prophet In The Old Law, Miracles, And Doctrine
Conformable To The Law

And as Miracles, without preaching that Doctrine which God hath
established; so preaching the true Doctrine, without the doing of
Miracles, is an unsufficient argument of immediate Revelation. For if
a man that teacheth not false Doctrine, should pretend to bee a Prophet
without shewing any Miracle, he is never the more to bee regarded for
his pretence, as is evident by Deut. 18. v. 21, 22. "If thou say in
thy heart, How shall we know that the Word (of the Prophet) is not that
which the Lord hath spoken. When the Prophet shall have spoken in the
name of the Lord, that which shall not come to passe, that’s the word
which the Lord hath not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it out of
the pride of his own heart, fear him not." But a man may here again ask,
When the Prophet hath foretold a thing, how shal we know whether it will
come to passe or not? For he may foretel it as a thing to arrive after
a certain long time, longer then the time of mans life; or indefinitely,
that it will come to passe one time or other: in which case this mark
of a Prophet is unusefull; and therefore the miracles that oblige us to
beleeve a Prophet, ought to be confirmed by an immediate, or a not
long deferr’d event. So that it is manifest, that the teaching of
the Religion which God hath established, and the showing of a present
Miracle, joined together, were the only marks whereby the Scripture
would have a true Prophet, that is to say immediate Revelation to be
acknowledged; neither of them being singly sufficient to oblige any
other man to regard what he saith.




Miracles Ceasing, Prophets Cease, The Scripture Supplies Their Place

Seeing therefore Miracles now cease, we have no sign left, whereby to
acknowledge the pretended Revelations, or Inspirations of any private
man; nor obligation to give ear to any Doctrine, farther than it is
conformable to the Holy Scriptures, which since the time of our Saviour,
supply the want of all other Prophecy; and from which, by wise and
careful ratiocination, all rules and precepts necessary to the knowledge
of our duty both to God and man, without Enthusiasme, or supernaturall
Inspiration, may easily be deduced. And this Scripture is it, out of
which I am to take the Principles of my Discourse, concerning the
Rights of those that are the Supream Govenors on earth, of Christian
Common-wealths; and of the duty of Christian Subjects towards their
Soveraigns. And to that end, I shall speak in the next Chapter, or the
Books, Writers, Scope and Authority of the Bible.




CHAPTER XXXIII. OF THE NUMBER, ANTIQUITY, SCOPE, AUTHORITY, AND
INTERPRETERS OF THE BOOKS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE




Of The Books Of Holy Scripture

By the Books of Holy SCRIPTURE, are understood those, which ought to be
the Canon, that is to say, the Rules of Christian life. And because all
Rules of life, which men are in conscience bound to observe, are Laws;
the question of the Scripture, is the question of what is Law throughout
all Christendome, both Naturall, and Civill. For though it be not
determined in Scripture, what Laws every Christian King shall constitute
in his own Dominions; yet it is determined what laws he shall not
constitute. Seeing therefore I have already proved, that Soveraigns
in their own Dominions are the sole Legislators; those Books only are
Canonicall, that is, Law, in every nation, which are established for
such by the Soveraign Authority. It is true, that God is the Soveraign
of all Soveraigns; and therefore, when he speaks to any Subject, he
ought to be obeyed, whatsoever any earthly Potentate command to the
contrary. But the question is not of obedience to God, but of When,
and What God hath said; which to Subjects that have no supernaturall
revelation, cannot be known, but by that naturall reason, which guided
them, for the obtaining of Peace and Justice, to obey the authority
of their severall Common-wealths; that is to say, of their lawfull
Soveraigns. According to this obligation, I can acknowledge no other
Books of the Old Testament, to be Holy Scripture, but those which have
been commanded to be acknowledged for such, by the Authority of the
Church of England. What Books these are, is sufficiently known, without
a Catalogue of them here; and they are the same that are acknowledged
by St. Jerome, who holdeth the rest, namely, the Wisdome of Solomon,
Ecclesiasticus, Judith, Tobias, the first and second of Maccabees,
(though he had seen the first in Hebrew) and the third and fourth of
Esdras, for Apocrypha. Of the Canonicall, Josephus a learned Jew, that
wrote in the time of the Emperor Domitian, reckoneth Twenty Two, making
the number agree with the Hebrew Alphabet. St. Jerome does the same,
though they reckon them in different manner. For Josephus numbers Five
Books of Moses, Thirteen of Prophets, that writ the History of their own
times (which how it agrees with the Prophets writings contained in the
Bible wee shall see hereafter), and Four of Hymnes and Morall Precepts.
But St. Jerome reckons Five Books of Moses, Eight of Prophets, and Nine
of other Holy writ, which he calls of Hagiographa. The Septuagint, who
were 70. learned men of the Jews, sent for by Ptolemy King of Egypt, to
translate the Jewish Law, out of the Hebrew into the Greek, have left us
no other for holy Scripture in the Greek tongue, but the same that are
received in the Church of England.

As for the Books of the New Testament, they are equally acknowledged for
Canon by all Christian Churches, and by all sects of Christians, that
admit any Books at all for Canonicall.




Their Antiquity

Who were the originall writers of the severall Books of Holy Scripture,
has not been made evident by any sufficient testimony of other History,
(which is the only proof of matter of fact); nor can be by any arguments
of naturall Reason; for Reason serves only to convince the truth (not
of fact, but) of consequence. The light therefore that must guide us in
this question, must be that which is held out unto us from the Bookes
themselves: And this light, though it show us not the writer of every
book, yet it is not unusefull to give us knowledge of the time, wherein
they were written.




The Pentateuch Not Written By Moses

And first, for the Pentateuch, it is not argument enough that they were
written by Moses, because they are called the five Books of Moses; no
more than these titles, The Book of Joshua, the Book of Judges, The Book
of Ruth, and the Books of the Kings, are arguments sufficient to prove,
that they were written by Joshua, by the Judges, by Ruth, and by the
Kings. For in titles of Books, the subject is marked, as often as the
writer. The History Of Livy, denotes the Writer; but the History Of
Scanderbeg, is denominated from the subject. We read in the last Chapter
of Deuteronomie, Ver. 6. concerning the sepulcher of Moses, "that no man
knoweth of his sepulcher to this day," that is, to the day wherein those
words were written. It is therefore manifest, that those words were
written after his interrement. For it were a strange interpretation, to
say Moses spake of his own sepulcher (though by Prophecy), that it was
not found to that day, wherein he was yet living. But it may perhaps
be alledged, that the last Chapter only, not the whole Pentateuch, was
written by some other man, but the rest not: Let us therefore consider
that which we find in the Book of Genesis, Chap. 12. Ver. 6 "And Abraham
passed through the land to the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh,
and the Canaanite was then in the land;" which must needs bee the
words of one that wrote when the Canaanite was not in the land; and
consequently, not of Moses, who dyed before he came into it. Likewise
Numbers 21. Ver. 14. the Writer citeth another more ancient Book,
Entituled, The Book of the Warres of the Lord, wherein were registred
the Acts of Moses, at the Red-sea, and at the brook of Arnon. It is
therefore sufficiently evident, that the five Books of Moses were
written after his time, though how long after it be not so manifest.

But though Moses did not compile those Books entirely, and in the form
we have them; yet he wrote all that which hee is there said to have
written: as for example, the Volume of the Law, which is contained, as
it seemeth in the 11 of Deuteronomie, and the following Chapters to the
27. which was also commanded to be written on stones, in their entry
into the land of Canaan. (Deut. 31. 9) And this did Moses himself
write, and deliver to the Priests and Elders of Israel, to be read
every seventh year to all Israel, at their assembling in the feast of
Tabernacles. And this is that Law which God commanded, that their Kings
(when they should have established that form of Government) should take
a copy of from the Priests and Levites to lay in the side of the Arke;
(Deut. 31. 26) and the same which having been lost, was long time after
found again by Hilkiah, and sent to King Josias, who causing it to be
read to the People, renewed the Covenant between God and them. (2 King.
22. 8 & 23. 1,2,3)




The Book of Joshua Written After His Time

That the Book of Joshua was also written long after the time of Joshua,
may be gathered out of many places of the Book it self. Joshua had
set up twelve stones in the middest of Jordan, for a monument of their
passage; (Josh 4. 9) of which the Writer saith thus, "They are there
unto this day;" (Josh 5. 9) for "unto this day", is a phrase that
signifieth a time past, beyond the memory of man. In like manner, upon
the saying of the Lord, that he had rolled off from the people the
Reproach of Egypt, the Writer saith, "The place is called Gilgal unto
this day;" which to have said in the time of Joshua had been improper.
So also the name of the Valley of Achor, from the trouble that Achan
raised in the Camp, (Josh. 7. 26) the Writer saith, "remaineth unto
this day;" which must needs bee therefore long after the time of Joshua.
Arguments of this kind there be many other; as Josh. 8. 29. 13. 13. 14.
14. 15. 63.




The Booke Of Judges And Ruth Written Long After The Captivity

The same is manifest by like arguments of the Book of Judges, chap. 1.
21,26 6.24 10.4 15.19 17.6 and Ruth 1. 1. but especially Judg. 18. 30.
where it is said, that Jonathan "and his sonnes were Priests to the
Tribe of Dan, untill the day of the captivity of the land."




The Like Of The Bookes Of Samuel

That the Books of Samuel were also written after his own time, there
are the like arguments, 1 Sam. 5.5. 7.13,15. 27.6. & 30.25. where, after
David had adjudged equall part of the spoiles, to them that guarded
the Ammunition, with them that fought, the Writer saith, "He made it a
Statute and an Ordinance to Israel to this day." (2. Sam. 6.4.) Again,
when David (displeased, that the Lord had slain Uzzah, for putting out
his hand to sustain the Ark,) called the place Perez-Uzzah, the Writer
saith, it is called so "to this day": the time therefore of the writing
of that Book, must be long after the time of the fact; that is, long
after the time of David.




The Books Of The Kings, And The Chronicles

As for the two Books of the Kings, and the two books of the Chronicles,
besides the places which mention such monuments, as the Writer saith,
remained till his own days; such as are 1 Kings 9.13. 9.21. 10. 12.
12.19. 2 Kings 2.22. 8.22. 10.27. 14.7. 16.6. 17.23. 17.34. 17.41. 1
Chron. 4.41. 5.26. It is argument sufficient they were written after the
captivity in Babylon, that the History of them is continued till that
time. For the Facts Registred are alwaies more ancient than such Books
as make mention of, and quote the Register; as these Books doe in divers
places, referring the Reader to the Chronicles of the Kings of Juda,
to the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel, to the Books of the Prophet
Samuel, or the Prophet Nathan, of the Prophet Ahijah; to the Vision of
Jehdo, to the Books of the Prophet Serveiah, and of the Prophet Addo.




Ezra And Nehemiah

The Books of Esdras and Nehemiah were written certainly after their
return from captivity; because their return, the re-edification of
the walls and houses of Jerusalem, the renovation of the Covenant, and
ordination of their policy are therein contained.




Esther

The History of Queen Esther is of the time of the Captivity; and
therefore the Writer must have been of the same time, or after it.




Job

The Book of Job hath no mark in it of the time wherein it was written:
and though it appear sufficiently (Exekiel 14.14, and James 5.11.)
that he was no fained person; yet the Book it self seemeth not to be
a History, but a Treatise concerning a question in ancient time much
disputed, "why wicked men have often prospered in this world, and good
men have been afflicted;" and it is the most probably, because from the
beginning, to the third verse of the third chapter, where the complaint
of Job beginneth, the Hebrew is (as St. Jerome testifies) in prose; and
from thence to the sixt verse of the last chapter in Hexameter Verses;
and the rest of that chapter again in prose. So that the dispute is all
in verse; and the prose is added, but as a Preface in the beginning, and
an Epilogue in the end. But Verse is no usuall stile of such, as either
are themselves in great pain, as Job; or of such as come to comfort
them, as his friends; but in Philosophy, especially morall Philosophy,
in ancient time frequent.




The Psalter

The Psalmes were written the most part by David, for the use of the
Quire. To these are added some songs of Moses, and other holy men; and
some of them after the return from the Captivity; as the 137. and the
126. whereby it is manifest that the Psalter was compiled, and put into
the form it now hath, after the return of the Jews from Babylon.




The Proverbs

The Proverbs, being a Collection of wise and godly Sayings, partly of
Solomon, partly of Agur the son of Jakeh; and partly of the Mother
of King Lemuel, cannot probably be thought to have been collected by
Solomon, rather then by Agur, or the Mother of Lemues; and that, though
the sentences be theirs, yet the collection or compiling them into this
one Book, was the work of some other godly man, that lived after them
all.




Ecclesiastes And The Canticles

The Books of Ecclesiastes and the Canticles have nothing that was not
Solomons, except it be the Titles, or Inscriptions. For "The Words of
the Preacher, the Son of David, King in Jerusalem;" and, "the Song of
Songs, which is Solomon’s," seem to have been made for distinctions
sake, then, when the Books of Scripture were gathered into one body of
the Law; to the end, that not the Doctrine only, but the Authors also
might be extant.




The Prophets

Of the Prophets, the most ancient, are Sophoniah, Jonas, Amos, Hosea,
Isaiah and Michaiah, who lived in the time of Amaziah, and Azariah,
otherwise Ozias, Kings of Judah. But the Book of Jonas is not properly
a Register of his Prophecy, (for that is contained in these few words,
"Fourty dayes and Ninivy shall be destroyed,") but a History or Narration
of his frowardenesse and disputing Gods commandements; so that there is
small probability he should be the Author, seeing he is the subject of
it. But the Book of Amos is his Prophecy.

Jeremiah, Abdias, Nahum, and Habakkuk prophecyed in the time of Josiah.

Ezekiel, Daniel, Aggeus, and Zacharias, in the Captivity.

When Joel and Malachi prophecyed, is not evident by their Writings. But
considering the Inscriptions, or Titles of their Books, it is manifest
enough, that the whole Scripture of the Old Testament, was set forth in
the form we have it, after the return of the Jews from their Captivity
in Babylon, and before the time of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, that caused
it to bee translated into Greek by seventy men, which were sent him
out of Judea for that purpose. And if the Books of Apocrypha (which
are recommended to us by the Church, though not for Canonicall, yet for
profitable Books for our instruction) may in this point be credited, the
Scripture was set forth in the form wee have it in, by Esdras; as may
appear by that which he himself saith, in the second book, chapt. 14.
verse 21, 22, &c. where speaking to God, he saith thus, "Thy law is
burnt; therefore no man knoweth the things which thou has done, or the
works that are to begin. But if I have found Grace before thee, send
down the holy Spirit into me, and I shall write all that hath been done
in the world, since the beginning, which were written in thy Law, that
men may find thy path, and that they which will live in the later days,
may live." And verse 45. "And it came to passe when the forty dayes were
fulfilled, that the Highest spake, saying, ‘The first that thou hast
written, publish openly, that the worthy and unworthy may read it; but
keep the seventy last, that thou mayst deliver them onely to such as
be wise among the people.’" And thus much concerning the time of the
writing of the Bookes of the Old Testament.




The New Testament

The Writers of the New Testament lived all in lesse then an age after
Christs Ascension, and had all of them seen our Saviour, or been his
Disciples, except St. Paul, and St. Luke; and consequently whatsoever
was written by them, is as ancient as the time of the Apostles. But
the time wherein the Books of the New Testament were received, and
acknowledged by the Church to be of their writing, is not altogether so
ancient. For, as the Bookes of the Old Testament are derived to us, from
no higher time then that of Esdras, who by the direction of Gods Spirit
retrived them, when they were lost: Those of the New Testament, of which
the copies were not many, nor could easily be all in any one private
mans hand, cannot bee derived from a higher time, that that wherein the
Governours of the Church collected, approved, and recommended them to
us, as the writings of those Apostles and Disciples; under whose names
they go. The first enumeration of all the Bookes, both of the Old,
and New Testament, is in the Canons of the Apostles, supposed to be
collected by Clement the first (after St. Peter) Bishop of Rome. But
because that is but supposed, and by many questioned, the Councell of
Laodicea is the first we know, that recommended the Bible to the then
Christian Churches, for the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles: and
this Councell was held in the 364. yeer after Christ. At which time,
though ambition had so far prevailed on the great Doctors of the Church,
as no more to esteem Emperours, though Christian, for the Shepherds of
the people, but for Sheep; and Emperours not Christian, for Wolves; and
endeavoured to passe their Doctrine, not for Counsell, and Information,
as Preachers; but for Laws, as absolute Governours; and thought such
frauds as tended to make the people the more obedient to Christian
Doctrine, to be pious; yet I am perswaded they did not therefore
falsifie the Scriptures, though the copies of the Books of the New
Testament, were in the hands only of the Ecclesiasticks; because if they
had had an intention so to doe, they would surely have made them more
favorable to their power over Christian Princes, and Civill Soveraignty,
than they are. I see not therefore any reason to doubt, but that the
Old, and New Testament, as we have them now, are the true Registers of
those things, which were done and said by the Prophets, and Apostles.
And so perhaps are some of those Books which are called Apocrypha, if
left out of the Canon, not for inconformity of Doctrine with the
rest, but only because they are not found in the Hebrew. For after the
conquest of Asia by Alexander the Great, there were few learned Jews,
that were not perfect in the Greek tongue. For the seventy Interpreters
that converted the Bible into Greek, were all of them Hebrews; and we
have extant the works of Philo and Josephus both Jews, written by them
eloquently in Greek. But it is not the Writer, but the authority of the
Church, that maketh a Book Canonicall.




Their Scope

And although these Books were written by divers men, yet it is manifest
the Writers were all indued with one and the same Spirit, in that they
conspire to one and the same end, which is the setting forth of the
Rights of the Kingdome of God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For
the Book of Genesis, deriveth the Genealogy of Gods people, from the
creation of the World, to the going into Egypt: the other four Books of
Moses, contain the Election of God for their King, and the Laws which
hee prescribed for their Government: The Books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth,
and Samuel, to the time of Saul, describe the acts of Gods people,
till the time they cast off Gods yoke, and called for a King, after the
manner of their neighbour nations; The rest of the History of the
Old Testament, derives the succession of the line of David, to the
Captivity, out of which line was to spring the restorer of the Kingdome
of God, even our blessed Saviour God the Son, whose coming was foretold
in the Bookes of the Prophets, after whom the Evangelists writt his
life, and actions, and his claim to the Kingdome, whilst he lived one
earth: and lastly, the Acts, and Epistles of the Apostles, declare the
coming of God, the Holy Ghost, and the Authority he left with them, and
their successors, for the direction of the Jews, and for the invitation
of the Gentiles. In summe, the Histories and the Prophecies of the old
Testament, and the Gospels, and Epistles of the New Testament, have had
one and the same scope, to convert men to the obedience of God; 1. in
Moses, and the Priests; 2. in the man Christ; and 3. in the Apostles and
the successors to Apostolicall power. For these three at several times
did represent the person of God: Moses, and his successors the High
Priests, and Kings of Judah, in the Old Testament: Christ himself, in
the time he lived on earth: and the Apostles, and their successors, from
the day of Pentecost (when the Holy Ghost descended on them) to this
day.




The Question Of The Authority Of The Scriptures Stated.

It is a question much disputed between the divers sects of Christian
Religion, From Whence The Scriptures Derive Their Authority; which
question is also propounded sometimes in other terms, as, How Wee Know
Them To Be The Word Of God, or, Why We Beleeve Them To Be So: and the
difficulty of resolving it, ariseth chiefly from the impropernesse of
the words wherein the question it self is couched. For it is beleeved
on all hands, that the first and originall Author of them is God; and
consequently the question disputed, is not that. Again, it is manifest,
that none can know they are Gods Word, (though all true Christians
beleeve it,) but those to whom God himself hath revealed it
supernaturally; and therefore the question is not rightly moved, of our
Knowledge of it. Lastly, when the question is propounded of our Beleefe;
because some are moved to beleeve for one, and others for other reasons,
there can be rendred no one generall answer for them all. The question
truly stated is, By What Authority They Are Made Law.




Their Authority And Interpretation

As far as they differ not from the Laws of Nature, there is no doubt,
but they are the Law of God, and carry their Authority with them,
legible to all men that have the use of naturall reason: but this is
no other Authority, then that of all other Morall Doctrine consonant to
Reason; the Dictates whereof are Laws, not Made, but Eternall.

If they be made Law by God himselfe, they are of the nature of written
Law, which are Laws to them only to whom God hath so sufficiently
published them, as no man can excuse himself, by saying, he know not
they were his.

He therefore, to whom God hath not supernaturally revealed, that they
are his, nor that those that published them, were sent by him, is not
obliged to obey them, by any Authority, but his, whose Commands have
already the force of Laws; that is to say, by any other Authority, then
that of the Common-wealth, residing in the Soveraign, who only has the
Legislative power. Again, if it be not the Legislative Authority of
the Common-wealth, that giveth them the force of Laws, it must bee
some other Authority derived from God, either private, or publique:
if private, it obliges onely him, to whom in particular God hath been
pleased to reveale it. For if every man should be obliged, to take for
Gods Law, what particular men, on pretence of private Inspiration, or
Revelation, should obtrude upon him, (in such a number of men, that out
of pride, and ignorance, take their own Dreams, and extravagant Fancies,
and Madnesse, for testimonies of Gods Spirit; or out of ambition,
pretend to such Divine testimonies, falsely, and contrary to their
own consciences,) it were impossible that any Divine Law should be
acknowledged. If publique, it is the Authority of the Common-wealth, or
of the Church. But the Church, if it be one person, is the same thing
with a Common-wealth of Christians; called a Common-wealth, because it
consisteth of men united in one person, their Soveraign; and a Church,
because it consisteth in Christian men, united in one Christian
Soveraign. But if the Church be not one person, then it hath no
authority at all; it can neither command, nor doe any action at all; nor
is capable of having any power, or right to any thing; nor has any Will,
Reason, nor Voice; for all these qualities are personall. Now if the
whole number of Christians be not contained in one Common-wealth, they
are not one person; nor is there an Universall Church that hath any
authority over them; and therefore the Scriptures are not made Laws,
by the Universall Church: or if it bee one Common-wealth, then all
Christian Monarchs, and States are private persons, and subject to
bee judged, deposed, and punished by an Universall Soveraigne of all
Christendome. So that the question of the Authority of the Scriptures is
reduced to this, "Whether Christian Kings, and the Soveraigne Assemblies
in Christian Common-wealths, be absolute in their own Territories,
immediately under God; or subject to one Vicar of Christ, constituted
over the Universall Church; to bee judged, condemned, deposed, and put
to death, as hee shall think expedient, or necessary for the common
good."

Which question cannot bee resolved, without a more particular
consideration of the Kingdome of God; from whence also, wee are to judge
of the Authority of Interpreting the Scripture. For, whosoever hath a
lawfull power over any Writing, to make it Law, hath the power also to
approve, or disapprove the interpretation of the same.



CHAPTER XXXIV. OF THE SIGNIFICATION OF SPIRIT, ANGEL, AND INSPIRATION IN
THE BOOKS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE




Body And Spirit How Taken In The Scripture

Seeing the foundation of all true Ratiocination, is the constant
Signification of words; which in the Doctrine following, dependeth not
(as in naturall science) on the Will of the Writer, nor (as in common
conversation) on vulgar use, but on the sense they carry in the
Scripture; It is necessary, before I proceed any further, to determine,
out of the Bible, the meaning of such words, as by their ambiguity, may
render what I am to inferre upon them, obscure, or disputable. I will
begin with the words BODY, and SPIRIT, which in the language of the
Schools are termed, Substances, Corporeall, and Incorporeall.

The Word Body, in the most generall acceptation, signifieth that
which filleth, or occupyeth some certain room, or imagined place; and
dependeth not on the imagination, but is a reall part of that we call
the Universe. For the Universe, being the Aggregate of all Bodies, there
is no reall part thereof that is not also Body; nor any thing properly
a Body, that is not also part of (that Aggregate of all Bodies) the
Universe. The same also, because Bodies are subject to change, that is
to say, to variety of apparence to the sense of living creatures, is
called Substance, that is to say, Subject, to various accidents, as
sometimes to be Moved, sometimes to stand Still; and to seem to our
senses sometimes Hot, sometimes Cold, sometimes of one Colour, Smel,
Tast, or Sound, somtimes of another. And this diversity of Seeming,
(produced by the diversity of the operation of bodies, on the organs
of our sense) we attribute to alterations of the Bodies that operate, &
call them Accidents of those Bodies. And according to this acceptation
of the word, Substance and Body, signifie the same thing; and therefore
Substance Incorporeall are words, which when they are joined together,
destroy one another, as if a man should say, an Incorporeall Body.

But in the sense of common people, not all the Universe is called Body,
but only such parts thereof as they can discern by the sense of Feeling,
to resist their force, or by the sense of their Eyes, to hinder them
from a farther prospect. Therefore in the common language of men, Aire,
and Aeriall Substances, use not to be taken for Bodies, but (as often
as men are sensible of their effects) are called Wind, or Breath, or
(because the some are called in the Latine Spiritus) Spirits; as when
they call that aeriall substance, which in the body of any living
creature, gives it life and motion, Vitall and Animall Spirits. But for
those Idols of the brain, which represent Bodies to us, where they
are not, as in a Looking-glasse, in a Dream, or to a Distempered brain
waking, they are (as the Apostle saith generally of all Idols) nothing;
Nothing at all, I say, there where they seem to bee; and in the brain
it self, nothing but tumult, proceeding either from the action of the
objects, or from the disorderly agitation of the Organs of our Sense.
And men, that are otherwise imployed, then to search into their causes,
know not of themselves, what to call them; and may therefore easily be
perswaded, by those whose knowledge they much reverence, some to
call them Bodies, and think them made of aire compacted by a power
supernaturall, because the sight judges them corporeall; and some to
call them Spirits, because the sense of Touch discerneth nothing in the
place where they appear, to resist their fingers: So that the proper
signification of Spirit in common speech, is either a subtile, fluid,
and invisible Body, or a Ghost, or other Idol or Phantasme of the
Imagination. But for metaphoricall significations, there be many: for
sometimes it is taken for Disposition or Inclination of the mind; as
when for the disposition to controwl the sayings of other men, we say,
A Spirit Contradiction; For A Disposition to Uncleannesse, An Unclean
Spirit; for Perversenesse, A Froward Spirit; for Sullennesse, A Dumb
Spirit, and for Inclination To Godlinesse, And Gods Service, the Spirit
of God: sometimes for any eminent ability, or extraordinary passion,
or disease of the mind, as when Great Wisdome is called the Spirit Of
Wisdome; and Mad Men are said to be Possessed With A Spirit.

Other signification of Spirit I find no where any; and where none
of these can satisfie the sense of that word in Scripture, the place
falleth not under humane Understanding; and our Faith therein consisteth
not in our Opinion, but in our Submission; as in all places where God
is said to be a Spirit; or where by the Spirit of God, is meant God
himselfe. For the nature of God is incomprehensible; that is to say, we
understand nothing of What He Is, but only That He Is; and therefore the
Attributes we give him, are not to tell one another, What He Is, Nor
to signifie our opinion of his Nature, but our desire to honor him with
such names as we conceive most honorable amongst our selves.




Spirit Of God Taken In The Scripture Sometimes For A Wind, Or Breath

Gen. 1. 2. "The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters." Here
if by the Spirit of God be meant God himself, then is Motion attributed
to God, and consequently Place, which are intelligible only of Bodies,
and not of substances incorporeall; and so the place is above our
understanding, that can conceive nothing moved that changes not place,
or that has not dimension; and whatsoever has dimension, is Body. But
the meaning of those words is best understood by the like place, Gen.
8. 1. Where when the earth was covered with Waters, as in the beginning,
God intending to abate them, and again to discover the dry land, useth
like words, "I will bring my Spirit upon the Earth, and the waters shall
be diminished:" in which place by Spirit is understood a Wind, (that is
an Aire or Spirit Moved,) which might be called (as in the former place)
the Spirit of God, because it was Gods Work.




Secondly, For Extraordinary Gifts Of The Understanding

Gen. 41. 38. Pharaoh calleth the Wisdome of Joseph, the Spirit of God.
For Joseph having advised him to look out a wise and discreet man, and
to set him over the land of Egypt, he saith thus, "Can we find such a
man as this is, in whom is the Spirit of God?" and Exod. 28.3. "Thou
shalt speak (saith God) to all that are wise hearted, whom I have filled
with the Spirit of Wisdome, to make Aaron Garments, to consecrate him."
Where extraordinary Understanding, though but in making Garments, as
being the Gift of God, is called the Spirit of God. The same is found
again, Exod. 31.3,4,5,6. and 35.31. And Isaiah 11.2,3. where the Prophet
speaking of the Messiah, saith, "The Spirit of the Lord shall abide upon
him, the Spirit of wisdome and understanding, the Spirit of counsell,
and fortitude; and the Spirit of the fear of the Lord." Where manifestly
is meant, not so many Ghosts, but so many eminent Graces that God would
give him.




Thirdly, For Extraordinary Affections

In the Book of Judges, an extraordinary Zeal, and Courage in the
defence of Gods people, is called the Spirit of God; as when it excited
Othoniel, Gideon, Jeptha, and Samson to deliver them from servitude,
Judg. 3.10. 6.34. 11.29. 13.25. 14.6,19. And of Saul, upon the newes of
the insolence of the Ammonites towards the men of Jabeth Gilead, it is
said (1 Sam.11.6.) that "The Spirit of God came upon Saul, and his Anger
(or, as it is in the Latine, His Fury) was kindled greatly." Where it is
not probable was meant a Ghost, but an extraordinary Zeal to punish the
cruelty of the Ammonites. In like manner by the Spirit of God, that came
upon Saul, when hee was amongst the Prophets that praised God in Songs,
and Musick (1 Sam.19.20.) is to be understood, not a Ghost, but an
unexpected and sudden Zeal to join with them in their devotions.




Fourthly, For The Gift Of Prediction By Dreams And Visions

The false Prophet Zedekiah, saith to Micaiah (1 Kings 22.24.) "Which way
went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak to thee?" Which cannot be
understood of a Ghost; for Micaiah declared before the Kings of Israel
and Judah, the event of the battle, as from a Vision, and not as from a
Spirit, speaking in him.

In the same manner it appeareth, in the Books of the Prophets, that
though they spake by the Spirit of God, that is to say, by a speciall
grace of Prediction; yet their knowledge of the future, was not by a
Ghost within them, but by some supernaturall Dream or Vision.




Fiftly, For Life

Gen. 2.7. It is said, "God made man of the dust of the Earth, and
breathed into his nostrills (spiraculum vitae) the breath of life, and
man was made a living soul." There the Breath of Life inspired by God,
signifies no more, but that God gave him life; And (Job 27.3.) "as long
as the Spirit of God is in my nostrils;" is no more then to say, "as
long as I live." So in Ezek. 1.20. "the Spirit of life was in the
wheels," is equivalent to, "the wheels were alive." And (Ezek. 2.30.)
"the spirit entred into me, and set me on my feet," that is, "I
recovered my vitall strength;" not that any Ghost, or incorporeal
substance entred into, and possessed his body.




Sixtly, For A Subordination To Authority

In the 11 chap. of Numbers. verse 17. "I will take (saith God) of the
Spirit, which is upon thee, and will put it upon them, and they shall
bear the burthen of the people with thee;" that is, upon the seventy
Elders: whereupon two of the seventy are said to prophecy in the campe;
of whom some complained, and Joshua desired Moses to forbid them; which
Moses would not doe. Whereby it appears; that Joshua knew not they had
received authority so to do, and prophecyed according to the mind of
Moses, that is to say, by a Spirit, or Authority subordinate to his own.

In the like sense we read (Deut. 34.9.) that "Joshua was full of the
Spirit of wisdome," because Moses had laid his hands upon him: that is,
because he was Ordained by Moses, to prosecute the work hee had himselfe
begun, (namely, the bringing of Gods people into the promised land), but
prevented by death, could not finish.

In the like sense it is said, (Rom. 8.9.) "If any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his:" not meaning thereby the Ghost of
Christ, but a Submission to his Doctrine. As also (1 John 4.2.) "Hereby
you shall know the Spirit of God; Every Spirit that confesseth that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God;" by which is meant the
Spirit of unfained Christianity, or Submission to that main Article of
Christian faith, that Jesus is the Christ; which cannot be interpreted
of a Ghost.

Likewise these words (Luke 4.1.) "And Jesus full of the Holy Ghost"
(that is, as it is exprest, Mat. 4.1. and Mar. 1.12. "of the Holy
Spirit",) may be understood, for Zeal to doe the work for which hee was
sent by God the Father: but to interpret it of a Ghost, is to say, that
God himselfe (for so our Saviour was,) was filled with God; which is
very unproper, and unsignificant. How we came to translate Spirits, by
the word Ghosts, which signifieth nothing, neither in heaven, nor earth,
but the Imaginary inhabitants of mans brain, I examine not: but this I
say, the word Spirit in the text signifieth no such thing; but either
properly a reall Substance, or Metaphorically, some extraordinary
Ability of Affection of the Mind, or of the Body.




Seventhly, For Aeriall Bodies

The Disciples of Christ, seeing him walking upon the sea, (Mat. 14.26.
and Marke 6.49.) supposed him to be a Spirit, meaning thereby an Aeriall
Body, and not a Phantasme: for it is said, they all saw him; which
cannot be understood of the delusions of the brain, (which are not
common to many at once, as visible Bodies are; but singular, because of
the differences of Fancies), but of Bodies only. In like manner, where
he was taken for a Spirit, by the same Apostles (Luke 24.3,7.): So also
(Acts 12.15) when St. Peter was delivered out of Prison, it would not
be beleeved; but when the Maid said he was at the dore, they said it
was his Angel; by which must be meant a corporeall substance, or we must
say, the Disciples themselves did follow the common opinion of both Jews
and Gentiles, that some such apparitions were not Imaginary, but Reall;
and such as needed not the fancy of man for their Existence: These the
Jews called Spirits, and Angels, Good or Bad; as the Greeks called the
same by the name of Daemons. And some such apparitions may be reall, and
substantiall; that is to say, subtile Bodies, which God can form by
the same power, by which he formed all things, and make use of, as of
Ministers, and Messengers (that is to say, Angels) to declare his
will, and execute the same when he pleaseth, in extraordinary and
supernaturall manner. But when hee hath so formed them they are
Substances, endued with dimensions, and take up roome, and can be moved
from place to place, which is peculiar to Bodies; and therefore are not
Ghosts Incorporeall, that is to say, Ghosts that are in No Place;
that is to say, that are No Where; that is to say, that seeming to be
Somewhat, are Nothing. But if corporeall be taken in the most vulgar
manner, for such Substances as are perceptible by our externall Senses;
then is Substance Incorporeall, a thing not Imaginary, but Reall;
namely, a thin Substance Invisible, but that hath the same dimensions
that are in grosser Bodies.




Angel What

By the name of ANGEL, is signified generally, a Messenger; and most
often, a Messenger of God: And by a Messenger of God, is signified, any
thing that makes known his extraordinary Presence; that is to say, the
extraordinary manifestation of his power, especially by a Dream, or
Vision.

Concerning the creation of Angels, there is nothing delivered in the
Scriptures. That they are Spirits, is often repeated: but by the name of
Spirit, is signified both in Scripture, and vulgarly, both amongst Jews,
and Gentiles, sometimes thin Bodies; as the Aire, the Wind, the Spirits
Vitall, and Animall, of living creatures; and sometimes the Images
that rise in the fancy in Dreams, and Visions; which are not reall
Substances, but accidents of the brain; yet when God raiseth them
supernaturally, to signifie his Will, they are not unproperly termed
Gods Messengers, that is to say, his Angels.

And as the Gentiles did vulgarly conceive the Imagery of the brain, for
things really subsistent without them, and not dependent on the fancy;
and out of them framed their opinions of Daemons, Good and Evill; which
because they seemed to subsist really, they called Substances; and
because they could not feel them with their hands, Incorporeall: so also
the Jews upon the same ground, without any thing in the Old Testament
that constrained them thereunto, had generally an opinion, (except the
sect of the Sadduces,) that those apparitions (which it pleased God
sometimes to produce in the fancie of men, for his own service, and
therefore called them his Angels) were substances, not dependent on the
fancy, but permanent creatures of God; whereof those which they thought
were good to them, they esteemed the Angels of God, and those they
thought would hurt them, they called Evill Angels, or Evill Spirits;
such as was the Spirit of Python, and the Spirits of Mad-men, of
Lunatiques, and Epileptiques: For they esteemed such as were troubled
with such diseases, Daemoniaques.

But if we consider the places of the Old Testament where Angels are
mentioned, we shall find, that in most of them, there can nothing else
be understood by the word Angel, but some image raised (supernaturally)
in the fancy, to signifie the presence of God in the execution of some
supernaturall work; and therefore in the rest, where their nature is not
exprest, it may be understood in the same manner.

For we read Gen. 16. that the same apparition is called, not onely an
Angel, but God; where that which (verse 7.) is called the Angel of
the Lord, in the tenth verse, saith to Agar, "I will multiply thy seed
exceedingly;" that is, speaketh in the person of God. Neither was this
apparition a Fancy figured, but a Voice. By which it is manifest,
that Angel signifieth there, nothing but God himself, that caused Agar
supernaturally to apprehend a voice supernaturall, testifying Gods
speciall presence there. Why therefore may not the Angels that appeared
to Lot, and are called Gen. 19.13. Men; and to whom, though they were
but two, Lot speaketh (ver. 18.) as but one, and that one, as God, (for
the words are, "Lot said unto them, Oh not so my Lord") be understood of
images of men, supernaturally formed in the Fancy; as well as before by
Angel was understood a fancyed Voice? When the Angel called to Abraham
out of heaven, to stay his hand (Gen. 22.11.) from slaying Isaac, there
was no Apparition, but a Voice; which neverthelesse was called properly
enough a Messenger, or Angel of God, because it declared Gods will
supernaturally, and saves the labour of supposing any permanent Ghosts.
The Angels which Jacob saw on the Ladder of Heaven (Gen. 28.12.) were
a Vision of his sleep; therefore onely Fancy, and a Dream; yet being
supernaturall, and signs of Gods Speciall presence, those apparitions
are not improperly called Angels. The same is to be understood
(Gen.31.11.) where Jacob saith thus, "The Angel of the Lord appeared to
mee in my sleep." For an apparition made to a man in his sleep, is
that which all men call a Dreame, whether such Dreame be naturall, or
supernaturall: and that which there Jacob calleth an Angel, was God
himselfe; for the same Angel saith (verse 13.) "I am the God of Bethel."

Also (Exod.14.9.) the Angel that went before the Army of Israel to the
Red Sea, and then came behind it, is (verse 19.) the Lord himself; and
he appeared not in the form of a beautifull man, but in form (by day)
of a Pillar Of Cloud and (by night) in form of a Pillar Of Fire; and yet
this Pillar was all the apparition, and Angel promised to Moses (Exod.
14.9.) for the Armies guide: For this cloudy pillar, is said, to have
descended, and stood at the dore of the Tabernacle, and to have talked
with Moses.

There you see Motion, and Speech, which are commonly attributed to
Angels, attributed to a Cloud, because the Cloud served as a sign of
Gods presence; and was no lesse an Angel, then if it had had the form of
a Man, or Child of never so great beauty; or Wings, as usually they are
painted, for the false instruction of common people. For it is not the
shape; but their use, that makes them Angels. But their use is to be
significations of Gods presence in supernaturall operations; As when
Moses (Exod. 33.14.) had desired God to goe along with the Campe, (as
he had done alwaies before the making of the Golden Calfe,) God did not
answer, "I will goe," nor "I will send an Angel in my stead;" but thus,
"my presence shall goe with thee."

To mention all the places of the Old Testament where the name of Angel
is found, would be too long. Therefore to comprehend them all at once,
I say, there is no text in that part of the Old Testament, which the
Church of England holdeth for Canonicall, from which we can conclude,
there is, or hath been created, any permanent thing (understood by the
name of Spirit or Angel,) that hath not quantity; and that may not be,
by the understanding divided; that is to say, considered by parts; so
as one part may bee in one place, and the next part in the next place
to it; and, in summe, which is not (taking Body for that, which is some
what, or some where) Corporeall; but in every place, the sense will bear
the interpretation of Angel, for Messenger; as John Baptist is called
an Angel, and Christ the Angel of the Covenant; and as (according to the
same Analogy) the Dove, and the Fiery Tongues, in that they were signes
of Gods speciall presence, might also be called Angels. Though we find
in Daniel two names of Angels, Gabriel, and Michael; yet is cleer out of
the text it selfe, (Dan. 12.1) that by Michael is meant Christ, not as
an Angel, but as a Prince: and that Gabriel (as the like apparitions
made to other holy men in their sleep) was nothing but a supernaturall
phantasme, by which it seemed to Daniel, in his dream, that two Saints
being in talke, one of them said to the other, "Gabriel, let us make
this man understand his Vision:" For God needeth not, to distinguish
his Celestiall servants by names, which are usefull onely to the short
memories of Mortalls. Nor in the New Testament is there any place, out
of which it can be proved, that Angels (except when they are put for
such men, as God hath made the Messengers, and Ministers of his word,
or works) are things permanent, and withall incorporeall. That they
are permanent, may bee gathered from the words of our Saviour himselfe,
(Mat. 25.41.) where he saith, it shall be said to the wicked in the last
day, "Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels:" which place is manifest for the permanence of Evill Angels,
(unlesse wee might think the name of Devill and his Angels may be
understood of the Churches Adversaries and their Ministers;) but then
it is repugnant to their Immateriality; because Everlasting fire is no
punishment to impatible substances, such as are all things Incorporeall.
Angels therefore are not thence proved to be Incorporeall. In like
manner where St. Paul sayes (1 Cor. 6.3.) "Knew ye not that wee shall
judge the Angels?" And (2 Pet. 2.4.) "For if God spared not the Angels
that sinned, but cast them down into Hell." And (Jude 1,6.) "And the
Angels that kept not their first estate, but left their owne habitation,
hee hath reserved in everlasting chaines under darknesse unto the
Judgement of the last day;" though it prove the Permanence of Angelicall
nature, it confirmeth also their Materiality. And (Mat. 22.30.) In the
resurrection men doe neither marry, nor give in marriage, but are as
the Angels of God in heaven:" but in the resurrection men shall be
Permanent, and not Incorporeall; so therefore also are the Angels.

There be divers other places out of which may be drawn the like
conclusion. To men that understand the signification of these words,
Substance, and Incorporeall; as Incorporeall is taken not for subtile
body, but for Not Body, they imply a contradiction: insomuch as to say,
an Angel, or Spirit is (in that sense) an Incorporeall Substance, is
to say in effect, there is no Angel nor Spirit at all. Considering
therefore the signification of the word Angel in the Old Testament, and
the nature of Dreams and Visions that happen to men by the ordinary way
of Nature; I was enclined to this opinion, that Angels were nothing
but supernaturall apparitions of the Fancy, raised by the speciall
and extraordinary operation of God, thereby to make his presence and
commandements known to mankind, and chiefly to his own people. But the
many places of the New Testament, and our Saviours own words, and in
such texts, wherein is no suspicion of corruption of the Scripture, have
extorted from my feeble Reason, an acknowledgement, and beleef, that
there be also Angels substantiall, and permanent. But to beleeve they be
in no place, that is to say, no where, that is to say, nothing, as they
(though indirectly) say, that will have them Incorporeall, cannot by
Scripture bee evinced.




Inspiration What

On the signification of the word Spirit, dependeth that of the word
INSPIRATION; which must either be taken properly; and then it is nothing
but the blowing into a man some thin and subtile aire, or wind, in such
manner as a man filleth a bladder with his breath; or if Spirits be not
corporeal, but have their existence only in the fancy, it is nothing but
the blowing in of a Phantasme; which is improper to say, and impossible;
for Phantasmes are not, but only seem to be somewhat. That word
therefore is used in the Scripture metaphorically onely: As (Gen. 2.7.)
where it is said, that God Inspired into man the breath of life, no more
is meant, then that God gave unto him vitall motion. For we are not to
think that God made first a living breath, and then blew it into Adam
after he was made, whether that breath were reall, or seeming; but only
as it is (Acts 17.25.) "that he gave him life and breath;" that is,
made him a living creature. And where it is said (2 Tim. 3.16.) "all
Scripture is given by Inspiration from God," speaking there of the
Scripture of the Old Testament, it is an easie metaphor, to signifie,
that God enclined the spirit or mind of those Writers, to write that
which should be usefull, in teaching, reproving, correcting, and
instructing men in the way of righteous living. But where St. Peter (2
Pet. 1.21.) saith, that "Prophecy came not in old time by the will
of man, but the holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy
Spirit," by the Holy Spirit, is meant the voice of God in a Dream, or
Vision supernaturall, which is not Inspiration; Nor when our Saviour
breathing on his Disciples, said, "Receive the Holy Spirit," was that
Breath the Spirit, but a sign of the spirituall graces he gave unto
them. And though it be said of many, and of our Saviour himself, that he
was full of the Holy Spirit; yet that Fulnesse is not to be understood
for Infusion of the substance of God, but for accumulation of his gifts,
such as are the gift of sanctity of life, of tongues, and the like,
whether attained supernaturally, or by study and industry; for in all
cases they are the gifts of God. So likewise where God sayes (Joel
2.28.) "I will powre out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and
your Daughters shall prophecy, your Old men shall dream Dreams, and your
Young men shall see Visions," wee are not to understand it in the
proper sense, as if his Spirit were like water, subject to effusion, or
infusion; but as if God had promised to give them Propheticall Dreams,
and Visions. For the proper use of the word Infused, in speaking of
the graces of God, is an abuse of it; for those graces are Vertues, not
Bodies to be carryed hither and thither, and to be powred into men, as
into barrels.

In the same manner, to take Inspiration in the proper sense, or to
say that Good Spirits entred into men to make them prophecy, or Evill
Spirits into those that became Phrenetique, Lunatique, or Epileptique,
is not to take the word in the sense of the Scripture; for the Spirit
there is taken for the power of God, working by causes to us unknown. As
also (Acts 2.2.) the wind, that is there said to fill the house wherein
the Apostles were assembled on the day of Pentecost, is not to be
understood for the Holy Spirit, which is the Deity it self; but for an
Externall sign of Gods speciall working on their hearts, to effect in
them the internall graces, and holy vertues hee thought requisite for
the performance of their Apostleship.




CHAPTER XXXV. OF THE SIGNIFICATION IN SCRIPTURE OF KINGDOME OF GOD, OF
HOLY, SACRED, AND SACRAMENT


Kingdom Of God Taken By Divines Metaphorically But In The Scriptures
Properly

The Kingdome of God in the Writings of Divines, and specially in
Sermons, and Treatises of Devotion, is taken most commonly for Eternall
Felicity, after this life, in the Highest Heaven, which they also call
the Kingdome of Glory; and sometimes for (the earnest of that felicity)
Sanctification, which they terme the Kingdome of Grace, but never
for the Monarchy, that is to say, the Soveraign Power of God over
any Subjects acquired by their own consent, which is the proper
signification of Kingdome.

To the contrary, I find the KINGDOME OF GOD, to signifie in most places
of Scripture, a Kingdome Properly So Named, constituted by the Votes
of the People of Israel in peculiar manner; wherein they chose God
for their King by Covenant made with him, upon Gods promising them the
possession of the land of Canaan; and but seldom metaphorically;
and then it is taken for Dominion Over Sinne; (and only in the New
Testament;) because such a Dominion as that, every Subject shall have in
the Kingdome of God, and without prejudice to the Soveraign.

From the very Creation, God not only reigned over all men Naturally by
his might; but also had Peculiar Subjects, whom he commanded by a Voice,
as one man speaketh to another. In which manner he Reigned over Adam,
and gave him commandement to abstaine from the tree of cognizance of
Good and Evill; which when he obeyed not, but tasting thereof, took upon
him to be as God, judging between Good and Evill, not by his Creators
commandement, but by his own sense, his punishment was a privation of
the estate of Eternall life, wherein God had at first created him: And
afterwards God punished his posterity, for their vices, all but eight
persons, with an universall deluge; And in these eight did consist the
then Kingdome Of God.




The Originall Of The Kingdome Of God

After this, it pleased God to speak to Abraham, and (Gen. 17.7,8.) to
make a Covenant with him in these words, "I will establish my Covenant
between me, and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations,
for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee, and to thy seed after
thee; And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land
wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan for an everlasting
possession." And for a memoriall, and a token of this Covenant, he
ordaineth (verse 11.) the Sacrament of Circumcision. This is it which is
called the Old Covenant, or Testament; and containeth a Contract between
God and Abraham; by which Abraham obligeth himself, and his posterity,
in a peculiar manner to be subject to Gods positive Law; for to the Law
Morall he was obliged before, as by an Oath of Allegiance. And though
the name of King be not yet given to God, nor of Kingdome to Abraham and
his seed; yet the thing is the same; namely, an Institution by pact,
of Gods peculiar Soveraignty over the seed of Abraham; which in the
renewing of the same Covenant by Moses, at Mount Sinai, is expressely
called a peculiar Kingdome of God over the Jews: and it is of Abraham
(not of Moses) St. Paul saith (Rom. 4.11.) that he is the "Father of the
Faithfull," that is, of those that are loyall, and doe not violate their
Allegiance sworn to God, then by Circumcision, and afterwards in the New
Covenant by Baptisme.




That The Kingdome Of God Is Properly His Civill Soveraignty Over A
Peculiar People By Pact

This Covenant, at the Foot of Mount Sinai, was renewed by Moses (Exod.
19.5.) where the Lord commandeth Moses to speak to the people in this
manner, "If you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then
yee shall be a peculiar people to me, for all the Earth is mine; and
yee shall be unto me a Sacerdotall Kingdome, and an holy Nation." For a
"Peculiar people" the vulgar Latine hath, Peculium De Cunctis Populis:
the English translation made in the beginning of the Reign of King
James, hath, a "Peculiar treasure unto me above all Nations;" and the
Geneva French, "the most precious Jewel of all Nations." But the truest
Translation is the first, because it is confirmed by St. Paul himself
(Tit. 2.14.) where he saith, alluding to that place, that our blessed
Saviour "gave himself for us, that he might purifie us to himself, a
peculiar (that is, an extraordinary) people:" for the word is in the
Greek periousios, which is opposed commonly to the word epiousios: and
as this signifieth Ordinary, Quotidian, or (as in the Lords Prayer) Of
Daily Use; so the other signifieth that which is Overplus, and Stored
Up, and Enjoyed In A Speciall Manner; which the Latines call Peculium;
and this meaning of the place is confirmed by the reason God rendereth
of it, which followeth immediately, in that he addeth, "For all the
Earth is mine," as if he should say, "All the Nations of the world are
mine;" but it is not so that you are mine, but in a Speciall Manner: For
they are all mine, by reason of my Power; but you shall be mine, by your
own Consent, and Covenant; which is an addition to his ordinary title,
to all nations.

The same is again confirmed in expresse words in the same Text, "Yee
shall be to me a Sacerdotall Kingdome, and an holy Nation." The Vulgar
Latine hath it, Regnum Sacerdotale, to which agreeth the Translation of
that place (1 Pet. 2.9.) Sacerdotium Regale, A Regal Priesthood; as also
the Institution it self, by which no man might enter into the Sanctum
Sanctorum, that is to say, no man might enquire Gods will immediately of
God himselfe, but onely the High Priest. The English Translation before
mentioned, following that of Geneva, has, "a Kingdome of Priests;" which
is either meant of the succession of one High Priest after another, or
else it accordeth not with St. Peter, nor with the exercise of the High
Priesthood; For there was never any but the High Priest onely, that was
to informe the People of Gods Will; nor any Convocation of Priests ever
allowed to enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum.

Again, the title of a Holy Nation confirmes the same: For Holy
signifies, that which is Gods by speciall, not by generall Right. All
the Earth (as is said in the text) is Gods; but all the Earth is
not called Holy, but that onely which is set apart for his especiall
service, as was the Nation of the Jews. It is therefore manifest enough
by this one place, that by the Kingdome of God, is properly meant a
Common-wealth, instituted (by the consent of those which were to be
subject thereto) for their Civill Government, and the regulating of
their behaviour, not onely towards God their King, but also towards one
another in point of justice, and towards other Nations both in peace and
warre; which properly was a Kingdome, wherein God was King, and the
High priest was to be (after the death of Moses) his sole Viceroy, or
Lieutenant.

But there be many other places that clearly prove the same. As first (1
Sam. 8.7.) when the Elders of Israel (grieved with the corruption of
the Sons of Samuel) demanded a King, Samuel displeased therewith, prayed
unto the Lord; and the Lord answering said unto him, "Hearken unto the
voice of the People, for they have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected me, that I should not reign over them." Out of which it is
evident, that God himself was then their King; and Samuel did not
command the people, but only delivered to them that which God from time
to time appointed him.

Again, (1 Sam. 12.12.) where Samuel saith to the People, "When yee saw
that Nahash King of the Children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto
me, Nay, but a King shall reign over us, when the Lord your God was your
King:" It is manifest that God was their King, and governed the Civill
State of their Common-wealth.

And after the Israelites had rejected God, the Prophets did foretell his
restitution; as (Isaiah 24.23.) "Then the Moon shall be confounded, and
the Sun ashamed when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and
in Jerusalem;" where he speaketh expressely of his Reign in Zion, and
Jerusalem; that is, on Earth. And (Micah 4.7.) "And the Lord shall
reign over them in Mount Zion:" This Mount Zion is in Jerusalem upon the
Earth. And (Ezek. 20.33.) "As I live, saith the Lord God, surely with a
mighty hand, and a stretched out arme, and with fury powred out, I wil
rule over you; and (verse 37.) I will cause you to passe under the rod,
and I will bring you into the bond of the Covenant;" that is, I will
reign over you, and make you to stand to that Covenant which you made
with me by Moses, and brake in your rebellion against me in the days of
Samuel, and in your election of another King.

And in the New testament, the Angel Gabriel saith of our Saviour (Luke
1.32,33) "He shall be great, and be called the Son of the Most High,
and the Lord shall give him the throne of his Father David; and he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his Kingdome there shall
be no end." This is also a Kingdome upon Earth; for the claim whereof,
as an enemy to Caesar, he was put to death; the title of his crosse,
was, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews; hee was crowned in scorn with
a crown of Thornes; and for the proclaiming of him, it is said of
the Disciples (Acts 17.7.) "That they did all of them contrary to
the decrees of Caesar, saying there was another King, one Jesus. The
Kingdome therefore of God, is a reall, not a metaphoricall Kingdome; and
so taken, not onely in the Old Testament, but the New; when we say, "For
thine is the Kingdome, the Power, and Glory," it is to be understood of
Gods Kingdome, by force of our Covenant, not by the Right of Gods Power;
for such a Kingdome God alwaies hath; so that it were superfluous to
say in our prayer, "Thy Kingdome come," unlesse it be meant of the
Restauration of that Kingdome of God by Christ, which by revolt of the
Israelites had been interrupted in the election of Saul. Nor had it been
proper to say, "The Kingdome of Heaven is at hand," or to pray, "Thy
Kingdome come," if it had still continued.

There be so many other places that confirm this interpretation, that it
were a wonder there is no greater notice taken of it, but that it gives
too much light to Christian Kings to see their right of Ecclesiastical
Government. This they have observed, that in stead of a Sacerdotall
Kingdome, translate, a Kingdome of Priests: for they may as well
translate a Royall Priesthood, (as it is in St. Peter) into a Priesthood
of Kings. And whereas, for a Peculiar People, they put a Pretious Jewel,
or Treasure, a man might as well call the speciall Regiment, or Company
of a Generall, the Generalls pretious Jewel, or his Treasure.

In short, the Kingdome of God is a Civill Kingdome; which consisted,
first in the obligation of the people of Israel to those Laws, which
Moses should bring unto them from Mount Sinai; and which afterwards the
High Priest of the time being, should deliver to them from before the
Cherubins in the Sanctum Sanctorum; and which kingdome having been cast
off, in the election of Saul, the Prophets foretold, should be restored
by Christ; and the Restauration whereof we daily pray for, when we
say in the Lords Prayer, "Thy Kingdome come;" and the Right whereof we
acknowledge, when we adde, "For thine is the Kingdome, the Power, and
Glory, for ever and ever, Amen;" and the Proclaiming whereof, was
the Preaching of the Apostles; and to which men are prepared, by the
Teachers of the Gospel; to embrace which Gospel, (that is to say, to
promise obedience to Gods government) is, to bee in the Kingdome of
Grace, because God hath gratis given to such the power to bee the
subjects (that is, Children) of God hereafter, when Christ shall come
in Majesty to judge the world, and actually to govern his owne people,
which is called the Kingdome of Glory. If the Kingdome of God (called
also the Kingdome of Heaven, from the gloriousnesse, and admirable
height of that throne) were not a Kingdome which God by his Lieutenant,
or Vicars, who deliver his Commandements to the people, did exercise on
Earth; there would not have been so much contention, and warre, about
who it is, by whom God speaketh to us; neither would many Priests have
troubled themselves with Spirituall Jurisdiction, nor any King have
denied it them.

Out of this literall interpretation of the Kingdome of God, ariseth also
the true interpretation of the word HOLY. For it is a word, which in
Gods Kingdome answereth to that, which men in their Kingdomes use to
call Publique, or the Kings.

The King of any Countrey is the Publique Person, or Representative of
all his own Subjects. And God the King of Israel was the Holy One of
Israel. The Nation which is subject to one earthly Soveraign, is the
Nation of that Soveraign, that is, of the Publique Person. So the Jews,
who were Gods Nation, were called (Exod. 19.6.) "a Holy Nation." For by
Holy, is alwaies understood, either God himselfe, or that which is Gods
in propriety; as by Publique is alwaies meant, either the Person of the
Common-wealth it self, or something that is so the Common-wealths, as no
private person can claim any propriety therein.

Therefore the Sabbath (Gods day) is a Holy Day; the Temple, (Gods house)
a Holy House; Sacrifices, Tithes, and Offerings (Gods tribute) Holy
Duties; Priests, Prophets, and anointed Kings, under Christ (Gods
ministers) Holy Men; The Coelestiall ministring Spirits (Gods
Messengers) Holy Angels; and the like: and wheresoever the word Holy is
taken properly, there is still something signified of Propriety, gotten
by consent. In saying "Hallowed be thy name," we do but pray to God for
grace to keep the first Commandement, of "having no other Gods but
Him." Mankind is Gods Nation in propriety: but the Jews only were a Holy
Nation. Why, but because they became his Propriety by covenant.




Sacred What

And the word Profane, is usually taken in the Scripture for the same
with Common; and consequently their contraries, Holy, and Proper, in the
Kingdome of God must be the same also. But figuratively, those men also
are called Holy, that led such godly lives, as if they had forsaken all
worldly designes, and wholly devoted, and given themselves to God.
In the proper sense, that which is made Holy by Gods appropriating or
separating it to his own use, is said to be Sanctified by God, as the
Seventh day in the fourth Commandement; and as the Elect in the New
Testament were said to bee Sanctified, when they were endued with the
Spirit of godlinesse. And that which is made Holy by the dedication of
men, and given to God, so as to be used onely in his publique service,
is called also SACRED, and said to be consecrated, as Temples, and other
Houses of Publique Prayer, and their Utensils, Priests, and Ministers,
Victimes, Offerings, and the externall matter of Sacraments.




Degrees of Sanctity

Of Holinesse there be degrees: for of those things that are set apart
for the service of God, there may bee some set apart again, for a neerer
and more especial service. The whole Nation of the Israelites were a
people Holy to God; yet the tribe of Levi was amongst the Israelites a
Holy tribe; and amongst the Levites, the Priests were yet more Holy; and
amongst the Priests, the High Priest was the most Holy. So the Land
of Judea was the Holy Land; but the Holy City wherein God was to be
worshipped, was more Holy; and again, the Temples more Holy than the
City; and the Sanctum Sanctorum more Holy than the rest of the Temple.




Sacrament

A SACRAMENT, is a separation of some visible thing from common use;
and a consecration of it to Gods service, for a sign, either of our
admission into the Kingdome of God, to be of the number of his peculiar
people, or for a Commemoration of the same. In the Old Testament, the
sign of Admission was Circumcision; in the New Testament, Baptisme. The
Commemoration of it in the Old Testament, was the Eating (at a certain
time, which was Anniversary) of the Paschall Lamb; by which they were
put in mind of the night wherein they were delivered out of their
bondage in Egypt; and in the New Testament, the celebrating of the
Lords Supper; by which, we are put in mind, of our deliverance from
the bondage of sin, by our Blessed Saviours death upon the crosse. The
Sacraments of Admission, are but once to be used, because there needs
but one Admission; but because we have need of being often put in
mind of our deliverance, and of our Allegeance, The Sacraments of
Commemoration have need to be reiterated. And these are the principall
Sacraments, and as it were the solemne oathes we make of our
Alleageance. There be also other Consecrations, that may be called
Sacraments, as the word implyeth onely Consecration to Gods service; but
as it implies an oath, or promise of Alleageance to God, there were no
other in the Old Testament, but Circumcision, and the Passover; nor
are there any other in the New Testament, but Baptisme, and the Lords
Supper.



CHAPTER XXXVI. OF THE WORD OF GOD, AND OF PROPHETS




Word What

When there is mention of the Word of God, or of Man, it doth not
signifie a part of Speech, such as Grammarians call a Nown, or a Verb,
or any simple voice, without a contexture with other words to make it
significative; but a perfect Speech or Discourse, whereby the speaker
Affirmeth, Denieth, Commandeth, Promiseth, Threateneth, Wisheth, or
Interrogateth. In which sense it is not Vocabulum, that signifies a
Word; but Sermo, (in Greek Logos) that is some Speech, Discourse, or
Saying.




The Words Spoken By God And Concerning God, Both Are Called Gods Word
In Scripture

Again, if we say the Word of God, or of Man, it may bee understood
sometimes of the Speaker, (as the words that God hath spoken, or that
a Man hath spoken): In which sense, when we say, the Gospel of St.
Matthew, we understand St. Matthew to be the Writer of it: and sometimes
of the Subject: In which sense, when we read in the Bible, "The words
of the days of the Kings of Israel, or Judah," ’tis meant, that the acts
that were done in those days, were the Subject of those Words; And in
the Greek, which (in the Scripture) retaineth many Hebraismes, by the
Word of God is oftentimes meant, not that which is spoken by God, but
concerning God, and his government; that is to say, the Doctrine of
Religion: Insomuch, as it is all one, to say Logos Theou, and Theologia;
which is, that Doctrine which wee usually call Divinity, as is manifest
by the places following (Acts 13.46.) "Then Paul and Barnabas waxed
bold, and said, It was necessary that the Word of God should first
have been spoken to you, but seeing you put it from you, and judge your
selves unworthy of everlasting life, loe, we turn to the Gentiles."
That which is here called the Word of god, was the Doctrine of Christian
Religion; as it appears evidently by that which goes before. And (Acts
5.20.) where it is said to the Apostles by an Angel, "Go stand and speak
in the Temple, all the Words of this life;" by the Words of this life,
is meant, the Doctrine of the Gospel; as is evident by what they did in
the Temple, and is expressed in the last verse of the same Chap. "Daily
in the Temple, and in every house they ceased not to teach and preach
Christ Jesus:" In which place it is manifest, that Jesus Christ was the
subject of this Word of Life; or (which is all one) the subject of the
Words of this Life Eternall, that our saviour offered them. So (Acts
15.7.) the Word of God, is called the Word of the Gospel, because it
containeth the Doctrine of the Kingdome of Christ; and the same Word
(Rom. 10.8,9.) is called the Word of Faith; that is, as is there
expressed, the Doctrine of Christ come, and raised from the dead. Also
(Mat. 13. 19.) "When any one heareth the Word of the Kingdome;" that is,
the Doctrine of the Kingdome taught by Christ. Again, the same Word, is
said (Acts 12. 24.) "to grow and to be multiplied;" which to understand
of the Evangelicall Doctrine is easie, but of the Voice, or Speech
of God, hard and strange. In the same sense the Doctrine of Devils,
signifieth not the Words of any Devill, but the Doctrine of Heathen men
concerning Daemons, and those Phantasms which they worshipped as Gods.
(1 Tim. 4.1.)

Considering these two significations of the WORD OF GOD, as it is taken
in Scripture, it is manifest in this later sense (where it is taken for
the Doctrine of the Christian Religion,) that the whole scripture is the
Word of God: but in the former sense not so. For example, though these
words, "I am the Lord thy God, &c." to the end of the Ten Commandements,
were spoken by God to Moses; yet the Preface, "God spake these words
and said," is to be understood for the Words of him that wrote the holy
History. The Word of God, as it is taken for that which he hath spoken,
is understood sometimes Properly, sometimes Metaphorically. Properly,
as the words, he hath spoken to his Prophets; Metaphorically, for his
Wisdome, Power, and eternall Decree, in making the world; in which
sense, those Fiats, "Let there be light," "Let there be a firmament,"
"Let us make man," &c. (Gen. 1.) are the Word of God. And in the same
sense it is said (John 1.3.) "All things were made by it, and without it
was nothing made that was made; And (Heb. 1.3.) "He upholdeth all things
by the word of his Power;" that is, by the Power of his Word; that is,
by his Power; and (Heb. 11.3.) "The worlds were framed by the Word
of God;" and many other places to the same sense: As also amongst the
Latines, the name of Fate, which signifieth properly The Word Spoken, is
taken in the same sense.




Secondly, For The Effect Of His Word

Secondly, for the effect of his Word; that is to say, for the thing it
self, which by his Word is Affirmed, Commanded, Threatned, or Promised;
as (Psalm 105.19.) where Joseph is said to have been kept in prison,
"till his Word was come;" that is, till that was come to passe which
he had (Gen. 40.13.) foretold to Pharaohs Butler, concerning his being
restored to his office: for there by His Word Was Come, is meant, the
thing it self was come to passe. So also (1 King. 18.36.) Elijah saith
to God, "I have done all these thy Words," in stead of "I have done all
these things at thy Word," or commandement: and (Jer. 17.15.) "Where is
the Word of the Lord," is put for, "Where is the Evill he threatened:"
And (Ezek. 12.28.) "There shall none of my Words be prolonged any
more:" by "Words" are understood those Things, which God promised to his
people. And in the New Testament (Mat. 24.35.) "heaven and earth shal
pass away, but my Words shall not pass away;" that is, there is nothing
that I have promised or foretold, that shall not come to passe. And in
this sense it is, that St. John the Evangelist, and, I think, St. John
onely calleth our Saviour himself as in the flesh "the Word of God
(as Joh. 1.14.) the Word was made Flesh;" that is to say, the Word, or
Promise that Christ should come into the world, "who in the beginning
was with God;" that is to say, it was in the purpose of God the Father,
to send God the Son into the world, to enlighten men in the way of
Eternall life, but it was not till then put in execution, and actually
incarnate; So that our Saviour is there called "the Word," not because
he was the promise, but the thing promised. They that taking occasion
from this place, doe commonly call him the Verbe of God, do but render
the text more obscure. They might as well term him the Nown of God:
for as by Nown, so also by Verbe, men understand nothing but a part
of speech, a voice, a sound, that neither affirms, nor denies, nor
commands, nor promiseth, nor is any substance corporeall, or spirituall;
and therefore it cannot be said to bee either God, or Man; whereas our
Saviour is both. And this Word which St. John in his Gospel saith was
with God, is (in his 1 Epistle, verse 1.) called "the Word of Life;" and
(verse 2.) "The eternall life, which was with the Father:" so that he
can be in no other sense called the Word, then in that, wherein he is
called Eternall life; that is, "he that hath procured us Eternall life,"
by his comming in the flesh. So also (Apocalypse 19.13.) the Apostle
speaking of Christ, clothed in a garment dipt in bloud, saith; his name
is "the Word of God;" which is to be understood, as if he had said his
name had been, "He that was come according to the purpose of God from
the beginning, and according to his Word and promises delivered by the
Prophets." So that there is nothing here of the Incarnation of a Word,
but of the Incarnation of God the Son, therefore called the Word,
because his Incarnation was the Performance of the Promise; In like
manner as the Holy Ghost is called The Promise. (Acts 1.4. Luke 24.49.)




Thirdly, For The Words Of Reason And Equity

There are also places of the Scripture, where, by the Word of God, is
signified such Words as are consonant to reason, and equity, though
spoken sometimes neither by prophet, nor by a holy man. For Pharaoh
Necho was an Idolator; yet his Words to the good King Josiah, in which
he advised him by Messengers, not to oppose him in his march against
Carchemish, are said to have proceeded from the mouth of God; and that
Josiah not hearkning to them, was slain in the battle; as is to be read
2 Chron. 35. vers. 21,22,23. It is true, that as the same History is
related in the first book of Esdras, not Pharaoh, but Jeremiah spake
these words to Josiah, from the mouth of the Lord. But wee are to
give credit to the Canonicall Scripture, whatsoever be written in the
Apocrypha.

The Word of God, is then also to be taken for the Dictates of reason,
and equity, when the same is said in the Scriptures to bee written in
mans heart; as Psalm 36.31. Jerem. 31.33. Deut.30.11, 14. and many other
like places.




Divers Acceptions Of The Word Prophet

The name of PROPHET, signifieth in Scripture sometimes Prolocutor; that
is, he that speaketh from God to Man, or from man to God: And sometimes
Praedictor, or a foreteller of things to come; And sometimes one that
speaketh incoherently, as men that are distracted. It is most frequently
used in the sense of speaking from God to the People. So Moses, Samuel,
Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others were Prophets. And in this sense
the High Priest was a Prophet, for he only went into the Sanctum
Sanctorum, to enquire of God; and was to declare his answer to the
people. And therefore when Caiphas said, it was expedient that one man
should die for the people, St. John saith (chap. 11.51.) that "He spake
not this of himselfe, but being High Priest that year, he prophesied
that one man should dye for the nation." Also they that in Christian
Congregations taught the people, (1 Cor. 14.3.) are said to Prophecy. In
the like sense it is, that God saith to Moses (Exod. 4.16.) concerning
Aaron, "He shall be thy Spokes-man to the People; and he shall be to
thee a mouth, and thou shalt be to him in stead of God;" that which here
is Spokesman, is (chap.7.1.) interpreted Prophet; "See (saith God)
I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy
Prophet." In the sense of speaking from man to God, Abraham is called
a Prophet (Genes. 20.7.) where God in a Dream speaketh to Abimelech
in this manner, "Now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a
Prophet, and shall pray for thee;" whereby may be also gathered,
that the name of Prophet may be given, not unproperly to them that
in Christian Churches, have a Calling to say publique prayers for the
Congregation. In the same sense, the Prophets that came down from the
High place (or Hill of God) with a Psaltery, and a Tabret, and a Pipe,
and a Harp (1 Sam. 10.5,6.) and (vers. 10.) Saul amongst them, are said
to Prophecy, in that they praised God, in that manner publiquely. In the
like sense, is Miriam (Exod. 15.20.) called a Prophetesse. So is it
also to be taken (1 Cor. 11.4,5.) where St. Paul saith, "Every man that
prayeth or prophecyeth with his head covered, &c. and every woman that
prayeth or prophecyeth with her head uncovered: For Prophecy in that
place, signifieth no more, but praising God in Psalmes, and Holy Songs;
which women might doe in the Church, though it were not lawfull for them
to speak to the Congregation. And in this signification it is, that the
Poets of the Heathen, that composed Hymnes and other sorts of Poems in
the honor of their Gods, were called Vates (Prophets) as is well enough
known by all that are versed in the Books of the Gentiles, and as
is evident (Tit. 1.12.) where St. Paul saith of the Cretians, that a
Prophet of their owne said, they were Liars; not that St. Paul held
their Poets for Prophets, but acknowledgeth that the word Prophet was
commonly used to signifie them that celebrated the honour of God in
Verse




Praediction Of Future Contingents, Not Alwaies Prophecy

When by Prophecy is meant Praediction, or foretelling of future
Contingents; not only they were Prophets, who were Gods Spokesmen, and
foretold those things to others, which God had foretold to them; but
also all those Imposters, that pretend by the helpe of familiar spirits,
or by superstitious divination of events past, from false causes, to
foretell the like events in time to come: of which (as I have declared
already in the 12. chapter of this Discourse) there be many kinds, who
gain in the opinion of the common sort of men, a greater reputation
of Prophecy, by one casuall event that may bee but wrested to their
purpose, than can be lost again by never so many failings. Prophecy is
not an art, nor (when it is taken for Praediction) a constant Vocation;
but an extraordinary, and temporary Employment from God, most often of
Good men, but sometimes also of the Wicked. The woman of Endor, who
is said to have had a familiar spirit, and thereby to have raised a
Phantasme of Samuel, and foretold Saul his death, was not therefore a
Prophetesse; for neither had she any science, whereby she could raise
such a Phantasme; nor does it appear that God commanded the raising of
it; but onely guided that Imposture to be a means of Sauls terror and
discouragement; and by consequent, of the discomfiture, by which he
fell. And for Incoherent Speech, it was amongst the Gentiles taken for
one sort of Prophecy, because the Prophets of their Oracles, intoxicated
with a spirit, or vapour from the cave of the Pythian Oracle at Delphi,
were for the time really mad, and spake like mad-men; of whose loose
words a sense might be made to fit any event, in such sort, as all
bodies are said to be made of Materia prima. In the Scripture I find
it also so taken (1 Sam. 18. 10.) in these words, "And the Evill spirit
came upon Saul, and he Prophecyed in the midst of the house."




The Manner How God Hath Spoken To The Prophets

And although there be so many significations in Scripture of the word
Prophet; yet is that the most frequent, in which it is taken for him,
to whom God speaketh immediately, that which the Prophet is to say from
him, to some other man, or to the people. And hereupon a question may
be asked, in what manner God speaketh to such a Prophet. Can it (may some
say) be properly said, that God hath voice and language, when it cannot
be properly said, he hath a tongue, or other organs, as a man? The
Prophet David argueth thus, "Shall he that made the eye, not see? or he
that made the ear, not hear?" But this may be spoken, not (as usually) to
signifie Gods nature, but to signifie our intention to honor him. For
to See, and Hear, are Honorable Attributes, and may be given to God, to
declare (as far as our capacity can conceive) his Almighty power. But
if it were to be taken in the strict, and proper sense, one might argue
from his making of all parts of mans body, that he had also the same use
of them which we have; which would be many of them so uncomely, as it
would be the greatest contumely in the world to ascribe them to him.
Therefore we are to interpret Gods speaking to men immediately, for that
way (whatsoever it be), by which God makes them understand his will: And
the wayes whereby he doth this, are many; and to be sought onely in the
Holy Scripture: where though many times it be said, that God spake to
this, and that person, without declaring in what manner; yet there be
again many places, that deliver also the signes by which they were
to acknowledge his presence, and commandement; and by these may be
understood, how he spake to many of the rest.




To The Extraordinary Prophets Of The Old Testament He Spake By Dreams,
Or Visions

In what manner God spake to Adam, and Eve, and Cain, and Noah, is not
expressed; nor how he spake to Abraham, till such time as he came out of
his own countrey to Sichem in the land of Canaan; and then (Gen. 12.7.)
God is said to have Appeared to him. So there is one way, whereby God
made his presence manifest; that is, by an Apparition, or Vision. And
again, (Gen. 15.1.) The Word of the Lord came to Abraham in a Vision;
that is to say, somewhat, as a sign of Gods presence, appeared as Gods
Messenger, to speak to him. Again, the Lord appeared to Abraham (Gen.
18. 1.) by an apparition of three Angels; and to Abimelech (Gen. 20. 3.)
in a dream: To Lot (Gen. 19. 1.) by an apparition of Two Angels: And
to Hagar (Gen. 21. 17.) by the apparition of one Angel: And to Abraham
again (Gen. 22. 11.) by the apparition of a voice from heaven: And (Gen.
26. 24.) to Isaac in the night; (that is, in his sleep, or by dream):
And to Jacob (Gen. 18. 12.) in a dream; that is to say (as are the words
of the text) "Jacob dreamed that he saw a ladder, &c." And (Gen. 32. 1.)
in a Vision of Angels: And to Moses (Exod. 3.2.) in the apparition of a
flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: And after the time of Moses,
(where the manner how God spake immediately to man in the Old Testament,
is expressed) hee spake alwaies by a Vision, or by a Dream; as to
Gideon, Samuel, Eliah, Elisha, Isaiah, Ezekiel, and the rest of the
Prophets; and often in the New Testament, as to Joseph, to St. Peter, to
St. Paul, and to St. John the Evangelist in the Apocalypse.

Onely to Moses hee spake in a more extraordinary manner in Mount Sinai,
and in the Tabernacle; and to the High Priest in the Tabernacle, and in
the Sanctum Sanctorum of the Temple. But Moses, and after him the
High Priests were Prophets of a more eminent place, and degree in
Gods favour; And God himself in express words declareth, that to other
Prophets hee spake in Dreams and Visions, but to his servant Moses, in
such manner as a man speaketh to his friend. The words are these (Numb.
12. 6,7,8.) "If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my
self known to him in a Vision, and will speak unto him in a Dream. My
servant Moses is not so, who is faithfull in all my house; with him I
will speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, not in dark speeches; and
the similitude of the Lord shall he behold." And (Exod. 33. 11.) "The
Lord spake to Moses face to face, as a man speaketh to his friend."
And yet this speaking of God to Moses, was by mediation of an Angel, or
Angels, as appears expressely, Acts 7. ver. 35. and 53. and Gal. 3. 19.
and was therefore a Vision, though a more cleer Vision than was given to
other Prophets. And conformable hereunto, where God saith (Deut. 13. 1.)
"If there arise amongst you a Prophet, or Dreamer of Dreams," the later
word is but the interpretation of the former. And (Joel 2. 28.) "Your
sons and your daughters shall Prophecy; your old men shall dream Dreams,
and your young men shall see Visions:" where again, the word Prophecy is
expounded by Dream, and Vision. And in the same manner it was, that God
spake to Solomon, promising him Wisdome, Riches, and Honor; for the text
saith, (1 Kings 3. 15.) "And Solomon awoak, and behold it was a Dream:"
So that generally the Prophets extraordinary in the old Testament took
notice of the Word of God no otherwise, than from their Dreams, or
Visions, that is to say, from the imaginations which they had in their
sleep, or in an Extasie; which imaginations in every true Prophet were
supernaturall; but in false Prophets were either naturall, or feigned.

The same Prophets were neverthelesse said to speak by the Spirit; as
(Zach. 7. 12.) where the Prophet speaking of the Jewes, saith, "They
made their hearths hard as Adamant, lest they should hear the law, and
the words which the Lord of Hosts hath sent in his Spirit by the former
Prophets." By which it is manifest, that speaking by the Spirit, or
Inspiration, was not a particular manner of Gods speaking, different
from Vision, when they that were said to speak by the Spirit, were
extraordinary Prophets, such as for every new message, were to have a
particular Commission, or (which is all one) a new Dream, or Vision.

To Prophets Of Perpetuall Calling, And Supreme, God Spake In The
Old Testament From The Mercy Seat, In A Manner Not Expressed In The
Scripture. Of Prophets, that were so by a perpetuall Calling in the Old
Testament, some were Supreme, and some Subordinate: Supreme were first
Moses; and after him the High Priest, every one for his time, as long
as the Priesthood was Royall; and after the people of the Jews, had
rejected God, that he should no more reign over them, those Kings which
submitted themselves to Gods government, were also his chief Prophets;
and the High Priests office became Ministeriall. And when God was to be
consulted, they put on the holy vestments, and enquired of the Lord,
as the King commanded them, and were deprived of their office, when
the King thought fit. For King Saul (1 Sam. 13. 9.) commanded the burnt
offering to be brought, and (1 Sam. 14. 18.) he commands the Priest to
bring the Ark neer him; and (ver. 19.) again to let it alone, because he
saw an advantage upon his enemies. And in the same chapter Saul asketh
counsell of God. In like manner King David, after his being anointed,
though before he had possession of the Kingdome, is said to "enquire
of the Lord" (1 Sam. 23. 2.) whether he should fight against the
Philistines at Keilah; and (verse 10.) David commandeth the Priest to
bring him the Ephod, to enquire whether he should stay in Keilah,
or not. And King Solomon (1 Kings 2. 27.) took the Priesthood from
Abiathar, and gave it (verse 35.) to Zadoc. Therefore Moses, and
the High Priests, and the pious Kings, who enquired of God on all
extraordinary occasions, how they were to carry themselves, or what
event they were to have, were all Soveraign Prophets. But in what manner
God spake unto them, is not manifest. To say that when Moses went up to
God in Mount Sinai, it was a Dream, or Vision, such as other Prophets
had, is contrary to that distinction which God made between Moses, and
other Prophets, Numb. 12. 6,7,8. To say God spake or appeared as he
is in his own nature, is to deny his Infinitenesse, Invisibility,
Incomprehensibility. To say he spake by Inspiration, or Infusion of the
Holy Spirit, as the Holy Spirit signifieth the Deity, is to make Moses
equall with Christ, in whom onely the Godhead (as St. Paul speaketh Col.
2.9.) dwelleth bodily. And lastly, to say he spake by the Holy Spirit,
as it signifieth the graces, or gifts of the Holy Spirit, is to
attribute nothing to him supernaturall. For God disposeth men to Piety,
Justice, Mercy, Truth, Faith, and all manner of Vertue, both Morall,
and Intellectuall, by doctrine, example, and by severall occasions,
naturall, and ordinary.

And as these ways cannot be applyed to God, in his speaking to Moses, at
Mount Sinai; so also, they cannot be applyed to him, in his speaking
to the High Priests, from the Mercy-Seat. Therefore in what manner God
spake to those Soveraign Prophets of the Old Testament, whose office
it was to enquire of him, is not intelligible. In the time of the New
Testament, there was no Soveraign Prophet, but our Saviour; who was both
God that spake, and the Prophet to whom he spake.

To Prophets Of Perpetuall Calling, But Subordinate, God Spake By The
Spirit. To subordinate Prophets of perpetuall Calling, I find not any
place that proveth God spake to them supernaturally; but onely in
such manner, as naturally he inclineth men to Piety, to Beleef, to
Righteousnesse, and to other vertues all other Christian Men. Which
way, though it consist in Constitution, Instruction, Education, and the
occasions and invitements men have to Christian vertues; yet it is truly
attributed to the operation of the Spirit of God, or Holy Spirit
(which we in our language call the Holy Ghost): For there is no good
inclination, that is not of the operation of God. But these operations
are not alwaies supernaturall. When therefore a Prophet is said to speak
in the Spirit, or by the Spirit of God, we are to understand no more,
but that he speaks according to Gods will, declared by the supreme
Prophet. For the most common acceptation of the word Spirit, is in the
signification of a mans intention, mind, or disposition.

In the time of Moses, there were seventy men besides himself, that
Prophecyed in the Campe of the Israelites. In what manner God spake to
them, is declared in the 11 of Numbers, verse 25. "The Lord came down in
a cloud, and spake unto Moses, and took of the Spirit that was upon him,
and gave it to the seventy Elders. And it came to passe, when the Spirit
rested upon them, they Prophecyed, and did not cease," By which it is
manifest, first, that their Prophecying to the people, was subservient,
and subordinate to the Prophecying of Moses; for that God took of the
Spirit of Moses, to put upon them; so that they Prophecyed as Moses
would have them: otherwise they had not been suffered to Prophecy at
all. For there was (verse 27.) a complaint made against them to Moses;
and Joshua would have Moses to have forbidden them; which he did not,
but said to Joshua, Bee not jealous in my behalf. Secondly, that
the Spirit of God in that place, signifieth nothing but the Mind and
Disposition to obey, and assist Moses in the administration of the
Government. For if it were meant they had the substantial Spirit of God;
that is, the Divine nature, inspired into them, then they had it in no
lesse manner than Christ himself, in whom onely the Spirit of God dwelt
bodily. It is meant therefore of the Gift and Grace of God, that guided
them to co-operate with Moses; from whom their Spirit was derived. And
it appeareth (verse 16.) that, they were such as Moses himself should
appoint for Elders and Officers of the People: For the words are,
"Gather unto me seventy men, whom thou knowest to be Elders and
Officers of the people:" where, "thou knowest," is the same with "thou
appointest," or "hast appointed to be such." For we are told
before (Exod. 18.) that Moses following the counsell of Jethro his
Father-in-law, did appoint Judges, and Officers over the people, such as
feared God; and of these, were those Seventy, whom God by putting upon
them Moses spirit, inclined to aid Moses in the Administration of the
Kingdome: and in this sense the Spirit of God is said (1 Sam. 16. 13,
14.) presently upon the anointing of David, to have come upon David, and
left Saul; God giving his graces to him he chose to govern his people,
and taking them away from him, he rejected. So that by the Spirit is
meant Inclination to Gods service; and not any supernaturall Revelation.




God Sometimes Also Spake By Lots

God spake also many times by the event of Lots; which were ordered by
such as he had put in Authority over his people. So wee read that God
manifested by the Lots which Saul caused to be drawn (1 Sam. 14. 43.)
the fault that Jonathan had committed, in eating a honey-comb, contrary
to the oath taken by the people. And (Josh. 18. 10.) God divided the
land of Canaan amongst the Israelite, by the "lots that Joshua did cast
before the Lord in Shiloh." In the same manner it seemeth to be, that
God discovered (Joshua 7.16., &c.) the crime of Achan. And these are the
wayes whereby God declared his Will in the Old Testament.

All which ways he used also in the New Testament. To the Virgin Mary, by
a Vision of an Angel: To Joseph in a Dream: again to Paul in the way
to Damascus in a Vision of our Saviour: and to Peter in the Vision of
a sheet let down from heaven, with divers sorts of flesh, of clean and
unclean, beasts; and in prison, by Vision of an Angel: And to all the
Apostles, and Writers of the New Testament, by the graces of his Spirit;
and to the Apostles again (at the choosing of Matthias in the place of
Judas Iscariot) by lot.




Every Man Ought To Examine The Probability Of A Pretended Prophets
Calling

Seeing then all Prophecy supposeth Vision, or Dream, (which two, when
they be naturall, are the same,) or some especiall gift of God, so
rarely observed in mankind, as to be admired where observed; and seeing
as well such gifts, as the most extraordinary Dreams, and Visions, may
proceed from God, not onely by his supernaturall, and immediate, but
also by his naturall operation, and by mediation of second causes;
there is need of Reason and Judgement to discern between naturall, and
supernaturall Gifts, and between naturall, and supernaturall Visions, or
Dreams. And consequently men had need to be very circumspect, and wary,
in obeying the voice of man, that pretending himself to be a Prophet,
requires us to obey God in that way, which he in Gods name telleth us to
be the way to happinesse. For he that pretends to teach men the way of
so great felicity, pretends to govern them; that is to say, to rule, and
reign over them; which is a thing, that all men naturally desire, and
is therefore worthy to be suspected of Ambition and Imposture; and
consequently, ought to be examined, and tryed by every man, before hee
yeeld them obedience; unlesse he have yeelded it them already, in
the institution of a Common-wealth; as when the Prophet is the Civill
Soveraign, or by the Civil Soveraign Authorized. And if this examination
of Prophets, and Spirits, were not allowed to every one of the people,
it had been to no purpose, to set out the marks, by which every man
might be able, to distinguish between those, whom they ought, and those
whom they ought not to follow. Seeing therefore such marks are set out
(Deut. 13. 1,&c.) to know a Prophet by; and (1 John 4.1.&C) to know a
Spirit by: and seeing there is so much Prophecying in the Old Testament;
and so much Preaching in the New Testament against Prophets; and so much
greater a number ordinarily of false Prophets, then of true; every
one is to beware of obeying their directions, at their own perill. And
first, that there were many more false than true Prophets, appears by
this, that when Ahab (1 Kings 12.) consulted four hundred Prophets, they
were all false Imposters, but onely one Michaiah. And a little before
the time of the Captivity, the Prophets were generally lyars. "The
Prophets" (saith the Lord by Jerem. cha. 14. verse 14.) "prophecy Lies
in my name. I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, nor spake
unto them, they prophecy to you a false Vision, a thing of naught; and
the deceit of their heart." In so much as God commanded the People by
the mouth of the Prophet Jeremiah (chap. 23. 16.) not to obey them.
"Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, hearken not unto the words of the
Prophets, that prophecy to you. They make you vain, they speak a Vision
of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord."




All Prophecy But Of The Soveraign Prophet Is To Be Examined By Every
Subject

Seeing then there was in the time of the Old Testament, such quarrells
amongst the Visionary Prophets, one contesting with another, and asking
When departed the Spirit from me, to go to thee? as between Michaiah,
and the rest of the four hundred; and such giving of the Lye to one
another, (as in Jerem. 14.14.) and such controversies in the New
Testament at this day, amongst the Spirituall Prophets: Every man then
was, and now is bound to make use of his Naturall Reason, to apply to
all Prophecy those Rules which God hath given us, to discern the
true from the false. Of which rules, in the Old Testament, one was,
conformable doctrine to that which Moses the Soveraign Prophet had
taught them; and the other the miraculous power of foretelling what God
would bring to passe, as I have already shown out of Deut. 13. 1. &c.
and in the New Testament there was but one onely mark; and that was the
preaching of this Doctrine, That Jesus Is The Christ, that is, the
King of the Jews, promised in the Old Testament. Whosoever denyed that
Article, he was a false Prophet, whatsoever miracles he might seem to
work; and he that taught it was a true Prophet. For St. John (1 Epist,
4. 2, &c) speaking expressely of the means to examine Spirits, whether
they be of God, or not; after he hath told them that there would arise
false Prophets, saith thus, "Hereby know ye the Spirit of God. Every
Spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God;" that is, is approved and allowed as a Prophet of God: not that
he is a godly man, or one of the Elect, for this, that he confesseth,
professeth, or preacheth Jesus to be the Christ; but for that he is a
Prophet avowed. For God sometimes speaketh by Prophets, whose persons he
hath not accepted; as he did by Baalam; and as he foretold Saul of his
death, by the Witch of Endor. Again in the next verse, "Every Spirit
that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is not
of Christ. And this is the Spirit of Antichrist." So that the rule is
perfect on both sides; that he is a true Prophet, which preacheth the
Messiah already come, in the person of Jesus; and he a false one that
denyeth him come, and looketh for him in some future Imposter, that
shall take upon him that honour falsely, whom the Apostle there properly
calleth Antichrist. Every man therefore ought to consider who is the
Soveraign Prophet; that is to say, who it is, that is Gods Viceregent
on earth; and hath next under God, the Authority of Governing Christian
men; and to observe for a Rule, that Doctrine, which in the name of
God, hee commanded to bee taught; and thereby to examine and try out
the truth of those Doctrines, which pretended Prophets with miracles, or
without, shall at any time advance: and if they find it contrary to that
Rule, to doe as they did, that came to Moses, and complained that there
were some that Prophecyed in the Campe, whose Authority so to doe they
doubted of; and leave to the Soveraign, as they did to Moses to uphold,
or to forbid them, as hee should see cause; and if hee disavow them,
then no more to obey their voice; or if he approve them, then to obey
them, as men to whom God hath given a part of the Spirit of their
Soveraigne. For when Christian men, take not their Christian Soveraign,
for Gods Prophet; they must either take their owne Dreams, for the
prophecy they mean to bee governed by, and the tumour of their own
hearts for the Spirit of God; or they must suffer themselves to bee lead
by some strange Prince; or by some of their fellow subjects, that can
bewitch them, by slander of the government, into rebellion, without
other miracle to confirm their calling, then sometimes an extraordinary
successe, and Impunity; and by this means destroying all laws, both
divine, and humane, reduce all Order, Government, and Society, to the
first Chaos of Violence, and Civill warre.



CHAPTER XXXVII. OF MIRACLES, AND THEIR USE




A Miracle Is A Work That Causeth Admiration

By Miracles are signified the Admirable works of God: & therefore they
are also called Wonders. And because they are for the most part, done,
for a signification of his commandement, in such occasions, as
without them, men are apt to doubt, (following their private naturall
reasoning,) what he hath commanded, and what not, they are commonly in
Holy Scripture, called Signes, in the same sense, as they are called by
the Latines, Ostenta, and Portenta, from shewing, and fore-signifying
that, which the Almighty is about to bring to passe.




And Must Therefore Be Rare, Whereof There Is No Naturall Cause Known

To understand therefore what is a Miracle, we must first understand what
works they are, which men wonder at, and call Admirable. And there be
but two things which make men wonder at any event: The one is, if it
be strange, that is to say, such, as the like of it hath never, or very
rarely been produced: The other is, if when it is produced, we cannot
imagine it to have been done by naturall means, but onely by the
immediate hand of God. But when wee see some possible, naturall cause of
it, how rarely soever the like has been done; or if the like have been
often done, how impossible soever it be to imagine a naturall means
thereof, we no more wonder, nor esteem it for a Miracle.

Therefore, if a Horse, or Cow should speak, it were a Miracle; because
both the thing is strange, & the Naturall cause difficult to imagin: So
also were it, to see a strange deviation of nature, in the production
of some new shape of a living creature. But when a man, or other Animal,
engenders his like, though we know no more how this is done, than the
other; yet because ’tis usuall, it is no Miracle. In like manner, if a
man be metamorphosed into a stone, or into a pillar, it is a Miracle;
because strange: but if a peece of wood be so changed; because we see it
often, it is no Miracle: and yet we know no more, by what operation of
God, the one is brought to passe, than the other.

The first Rainbow that was seen in the world, was a Miracle, because the
first; and consequently strange; and served for a sign from God, placed
in heaven, to assure his people, there should be no more an universall
destruction of the world by Water. But at this day, because they
are frequent, they are not Miracles, neither to them that know their
naturall causes, nor to them who know them not. Again, there be many
rare works produced by the Art of man: yet when we know they are done;
because thereby wee know also the means how they are done, we count them
not for Miracles, because not wrought by the immediate hand of God, but
by mediation of humane Industry.




That Which Seemeth A Miracle To One Man, May Seem Otherwise To Another

Furthermore, seeing Admiration and Wonder, is consequent to the
knowledge and experience, wherewith men are endued, some more, some
lesse; it followeth, that the same thing, may be a Miracle to one, and
not to another. And thence it is, that ignorant, and superstitious men
make great Wonders of those works, which other men, knowing to proceed
from Nature, (which is not the immediate, but the ordinary work of God,)
admire not at all: As when Ecclipses of the Sun and Moon have been taken
for supernaturall works, by the common people; when neverthelesse, there
were others, could from their naturall causes, have foretold the very
hour they should arrive: Or, as when a man, by confederacy, and secret
intelligence, getting knowledge of the private actions of an ignorant,
unwary man, thereby tells him, what he has done in former time; it seems
to him a Miraculous thing; but amongst wise, and cautelous men, such
Miracles as those, cannot easily be done.




The End Of Miracles

Again, it belongeth to the nature of a Miracle, that it be wrought for
the procuring of credit to Gods Messengers, Ministers, and Prophets,
that thereby men may know, they are called, sent, and employed by God,
and thereby be the better inclined to obey them. And therefore, though
the creation of the world, and after that the destruction of all living
creatures in the universall deluge, were admirable works; yet because
they were not done to procure credit to any Prophet, or other Minister
of God, they use not to be called Miracles. For how admirable soever any
work be, the Admiration consisteth not in that it could be done, because
men naturally beleeve the Almighty can doe all things, but because he
does it at the Prayer, or Word of a man. But the works of God in Egypt,
by the hand of Moses, were properly Miracles; because they were done
with intention to make the people of Israel beleeve, that Moses came
unto them, not out of any design of his owne interest, but as sent from
God. Therefore after God had commanded him to deliver the Israelites
from the Egyptian bondage, when he said (Exod 4.1. &c.) "They will not
beleeve me, but will say, the Lord hath not appeared unto me," God gave
him power, to turn the Rod he had in his hand into a Serpent, and again
to return it into a Rod; and by putting his hand into his bosome, to
make it leprous; and again by pulling it out to make it whole, to make
the Children of Israel beleeve (as it is verse 5.) that the God of their
Fathers had appeared unto him; And if that were not enough, he gave
him power to turn their waters into bloud. And when hee had done these
Miracles before the people, it is said (verse 41.) that "they beleeved
him." Neverthelesse, for fear of Pharaoh, they durst not yet obey him.
Therefore the other works which were done to plague Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, tended all to make the Israelites beleeve in Moses, and were
properly Miracles. In like manner if we consider all the Miracles
done by the hand of Moses, and all the rest of the Prophets, till the
Captivity; and those of our Saviour, and his Apostles afterward; we
shall find, their end was alwaies to beget, or confirm beleefe, that
they came not of their own motion, but were sent by God. Wee may further
observe in Scripture, that the end of Miracles, was to beget beleef,
not universally in all men, elect, and reprobate; but in the elect
only; that is to say, is such as God had determined should become his
Subjects. For those miraculous plagues of Egypt, had not for end, the
conversion of Pharaoh; For God had told Moses before, that he would
harden the heart of Pharaoh, that he should not let the people goe: And
when he let them goe at last, not the Miracles perswaded him, but the
plagues forced him to it. So also of our Saviour, it is written, (Mat.
13. 58.) that he wrought not many Miracles in his own countrey, because
of their unbeleef; and (in Marke 6.5.) in stead of, "he wrought not
many," it is, "he could work none." It was not because he wanted power;
which to say, were blasphemy against God; nor that the end of Miracles
was not to convert incredulous men to Christ; for the end of all the
Miracles of Moses, of Prophets, of our Saviour, and of his Apostles
was to adde men to the Church; but it was, because the end of their
Miracles, was to adde to the Church (not all men, but) such as should
be saved; that is to say, such as God had elected. Seeing therefore
our Saviour sent from his Father, hee could not use his power in the
conversion of those, whom his Father had rejected. They that expounding
this place of St. Marke, say, that his word, "Hee could not," is put
for, "He would not," do it without example in the Greek tongue, (where
Would Not, is put sometimes for Could Not, in things inanimate, that
have no will; but Could Not, for Would Not, never,) and thereby lay
a stumbling block before weak Christians; as if Christ could doe no
Miracles, but amongst the credulous.




The Definition Of A Miracle

From that which I have here set down, of the nature, and use of a
Miracle, we may define it thus, "A MIRACLE, is a work of God, (besides
his operation by the way of Nature, ordained in the Creation,) done
for the making manifest to his elect, the mission of an extraordinary
Minister for their salvation."

And from this definition, we may inferre; First, that in all Miracles,
the work done, is not the effect of any vertue in the Prophet; because
it is the effect of the immediate hand of God; that is to say God hath
done it, without using the Prophet therein, as a subordinate cause.

Secondly, that no Devil, Angel, or other created Spirit, can do a
Miracle. For it must either be by vertue of some naturall science, or
by Incantation, that is, vertue of words. For if the Inchanters do it
by their own power independent, there is some power that proceedeth not
from God; which all men deny: and if they doe it by power given them,
then is the work not from the immediate hand of God, but naturall, and
consequently no Miracle.

There be some texts of Scripture, that seem to attribute the power of
working wonders (equall to some of those immediate Miracles, wrought
by God himself,) to certain Arts of Magick, and Incantation. As for
example, when we read that after the Rod of Moses being cast on the
ground became a Serpent, (Exod. 7. 11.) "the Magicians of Egypt did the
like by their Enchantments;" and that after Moses had turned the waters
of the Egyptian Streams, Rivers, Ponds, and Pooles of water into blood,
(Exod. 7. 22.) "the Magicians of Egypt did so likewise, with their
Enchantments;" and that after Moses had by the power of God brought
frogs upon the land, (Exod. 8. 7.) "the Magicians also did so with their
Enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt;" will not a
man be apt to attribute Miracles to Enchantments; that is to say, to the
efficacy of the sound of Words; and think the same very well proved out
of this, and other such places? and yet there is no place of Scripture,
that telleth us what on Enchantment is. If therefore Enchantment be not,
as many think it, a working of strange effects by spells, and words;
but Imposture, and delusion, wrought by ordinary means; and so far
from supernaturall, as the Impostors need not the study so much as of
naturall causes, but the ordinary ignorance, stupidity, and superstition
of mankind, to doe them; those texts that seem to countenance the power
of Magick, Witchcraft, and Enchantment, must needs have another sense,
than at first sight they seem to bear.




That Men Are Apt To Be Deceived By False Miracles

For it is evident enough, that Words have no effect, but on those
that understand them; and then they have no other, but to signifie the
intentions, or passions of them that speak; and thereby produce, hope,
fear, or other passions, or conceptions in the hearer. Therefore when a
Rod seemeth a Serpent, or the Water Bloud, or any other Miracle seemeth
done by Enchantment; if it be not to the edification of Gods people,
not the Rod, nor the Water, nor any other thing is enchanted; that is
to say, wrought upon by the Words, but the Spectator. So that all the
Miracle consisteth in this, that the Enchanter has deceived a man; which
is no Miracle, but a very easie matter to doe.

For such is the ignorance, and aptitude to error generally of all men,
but especially of them that have not much knowledge of naturall causes,
and of the nature, and interests of men; as by innumerable and easie
tricks to be abused. What opinion of miraculous power, before it was
known there was a Science of the course of the Stars, might a man have
gained, that should have told the people, This hour, or day the Sun
should be darkned? A juggler by the handling of his goblets, and other
trinkets, if it were not now ordinarily practised, would be thought
to do his wonders by the power at least of the Devil. A man that hath
practised to speak by drawing in of his breath, (which kind of men in
antient time were called Ventriloqui,) and so make the weaknesse of
his voice seem to proceed, not from the weak impulsion of the organs
of Speech, but from distance of place, is able to make very many men
beleeve it is a voice from Heaven, whatsoever he please to tell them.
And for a crafty man, that hath enquired into the secrets, and familiar
confessions that one man ordinarily maketh to another of his actions and
adventures past, to tell them him again is no hard matter; and yet there
be many, that by such means as that, obtain the reputation of being
Conjurers. But it is too long a businesse, to reckon up the severall
sorts of those men, which the Greeks called Thaumaturgi, that is to say,
workers of things wonderfull; and yet these do all they do, by their
own single dexterity. But if we looke upon the Impostures wrought by
Confederacy, there is nothing how impossible soever to be done, that is
impossible to bee beleeved. For two men conspiring, one to seem lame,
the other to cure him with a charme, will deceive many: but many
conspiring, one to seem lame, another so to cure him, and all the rest
to bear witnesse; will deceive many more.




Cautions Against The Imposture Of Miracles

In this aptitude of mankind, to give too hasty beleefe to pretended
Miracles, there can be no better, nor I think any other caution, than
that which God hath prescribed, first by Moses, (as I have said before
in the precedent chapter,) in the beginning of the 13. and end of the
18. of Deuteronomy; That wee take not any for Prophets, that teach any
other Religion, then that which Gods Lieutenant, (which at that time was
Moses,) hath established; nor any, (though he teach the same Religion,)
whose Praediction we doe not see come to passe. Moses therefore in his
time, and Aaron, and his successors in their times, and the Soveraign
Governour of Gods people, next under God himself, that is to say, the
Head of the Church in all times, are to be consulted, what doctrine
he hath established, before wee give credit to a pretended Miracle, or
Prophet. And when that is done, the thing they pretend to be a Miracle,
we must both see it done, and use all means possible to consider,
whether it be really done; and not onely so, but whether it be such, as
no man can do the like by his naturall power, but that it requires the
immediate hand of God. And in this also we must have recourse to Gods
Lieutenant; to whom in all doubtfull cases, wee have submitted our
private judgments. For Example; if a man pretend, that after certain
words spoken over a peece of bread, that presently God hath made it not
bread, but a God, or a man, or both, and neverthelesse it looketh still
as like bread as ever it did; there is no reason for any man to think
it really done; nor consequently to fear him, till he enquire of God,
by his Vicar, or Lieutenant, whether it be done, or not. If he say not,
then followeth that which Moses saith, (Deut. 18. 22.) "he hath spoken
it presumptuously, thou shalt not fear him." If he say ’tis done, then
he is not to contradict it. So also if wee see not, but onely hear tell
of a Miracle, we are to consult the Lawful Church; that is to say, the
lawful Head thereof, how far we are to give credit to the relators of
it. And this is chiefly the case of men, that in these days live under
Christian Soveraigns. For in these times, I do not know one man, that
ever saw any such wondrous work, done by the charm, or at the word,
or prayer of a man, that a man endued but with a mediocrity of reason,
would think supernaturall: and the question is no more, whether what wee
see done, be a Miracle; whether the Miracle we hear, or read of, were
a reall work, and not the Act of a tongue, or pen; but in plain terms,
whether the report be true, or a lye. In which question we are not every
one, to make our own private Reason, or Conscience, but the Publique
Reason, that is, the reason of Gods Supreme Lieutenant, Judge; and
indeed we have made him Judge already, if wee have given him a Soveraign
power, to doe all that is necessary for our peace and defence. A private
man has alwaies the liberty, (because thought is free,) to beleeve,
or not beleeve in his heart, those acts that have been given out for
Miracles, according as he shall see, what benefit can accrew by
mens belief, to those that pretend, or countenance them, and thereby
conjecture, whether they be Miracles, or Lies. But when it comes
to confession of that faith, the Private Reason must submit to the
Publique; that is to say, to Gods Lieutenant. But who is this Lieutenant
of God, and Head of the Church, shall be considered in its proper place
thereafter.



CHAPTER XXXVIII. OF THE SIGNIFICATION IN SCRIPTURE OF ETERNALL LIFE,
HELL, SALVATION, THE WORLD TO COME, AND REDEMPTION


The maintenance of Civill Society, depending on Justice; and Justice on
the power of Life and Death, and other lesse Rewards and Punishments,
residing in them that have the Soveraignty of the Common-wealth; It
is impossible a Common-wealth should stand, where any other than the
Soveraign, hath a power of giving greater rewards than Life; and of
inflicting greater punishments than Death. Now seeing Eternall Life is
a greater reward, than the Life Present; and Eternall Torment a greater
punishment than the Death of Nature; It is a thing worthy to be well
considered, of all men that desire (by obeying Authority) to avoid
the calamities of Confusion, and Civill war, what is meant in Holy
Scripture, by Life Eternall, and Torment Eternall; and for what
offences, against whom committed, men are to be Eternally Tormented; and
for what actions, they are to obtain Eternall Life.




Place Of Adams Eternity If He Had Not Sinned, The Terrestrial Paradise

And first we find, that Adam was created in such a condition of life,
as had he not broken the commandement of God, he had enjoyed it in the
Paradise of Eden Everlastingly. For there was the Tree of Life; whereof
he was so long allowed to eat, as he should forbear to eat of the tree
of Knowledge of Good an Evill; which was not allowed him. And therefore
as soon as he had eaten of it, God thrust him out of Paradise, "lest he
should put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and live
for ever." (Gen. 3. 22.) By which it seemeth to me, (with submission
neverthelesse both in this, and in all questions, whereof the
determination dependeth on the Scriptures, to the interpretation of the
Bible authorized by the Common-wealth, whose Subject I am,) that Adam if
he had not sinned, had had an Eternall Life on Earth: and that Mortality
entred upon himself, and his posterity, by his first Sin. Not that
actuall Death then entred; for Adam then could never have had children;
whereas he lived long after, and saw a numerous posterity ere he dyed.
But where it is said, "In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt
surely die," it must needs bee meant of his Mortality, and certitude
of death. Seeing then Eternall life was lost by Adams forfeiture, in
committing sin, he that should cancell that forfeiture was to recover
thereby, that Life again. Now Jesus Christ hath satisfied for the sins
of all that beleeve in him; and therefore recovered to all beleevers,
that ETERNALL LIFE, which was lost by the sin of Adam. And in this sense
it is, that the comparison of St. Paul holdeth (Rom. 5.18, 19.) "As by
the offence of one, Judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even
so by the righteousnesse of one, the free gift came upon all men
to Justification of Life." Which is again (1 Cor. 15.21,22) more
perspicuously delivered in these words, "For since by man came death, by
man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even
so in Christ shall all be made alive."




Texts Concerning The Place Of Life Eternall For Beleevers

Concerning the place wherein men shall enjoy that Eternall Life, which
Christ hath obtained for them, the texts next before alledged seem to
make it on Earth. For if as in Adam, all die, that is, have forfeited
Paradise, and Eternall Life on Earth; even so in Christ all shall be
made alive; then all men shall be made to live on Earth; for else
the comparison were not proper. Hereunto seemeth to agree that of the
Psalmist, (Psal. 133.3.) "Upon Zion God commanded the blessing, even
Life for evermore;" for Zion, is in Jerusalem, upon Earth: as also that
of S. Joh. (Rev. 2.7.) "To him that overcommeth I will give to eat of
the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God." This
was the tree of Adams Eternall life; but his life was to have been on
Earth. The same seemeth to be confirmed again by St. Joh. (Rev. 21.2.)
where he saith, "I John saw the Holy City, New Jerusalem, coming down
from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband:"
and again v. 10. to the same effect: As if he should say, the new
Jerusalem, the Paradise of God, at the coming again of Christ, should
come down to Gods people from Heaven, and not they goe up to it from
Earth. And this differs nothing from that, which the two men in white
clothing (that is, the two Angels) said to the Apostles, that were
looking upon Christ ascending (Acts 1.11.) "This same Jesus, who is
taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come, as you have seen him go up
into Heaven." Which soundeth as if they had said, he should come down
to govern them under his Father, Eternally here; and not take them up
to govern them in Heaven; and is conformable to the Restauration of the
Kingdom of God, instituted under Moses; which was a Political government
of the Jews on Earth. Again, that saying of our Saviour (Mat. 22.30.)
"that in the Resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage,
but are as the Angels of God in heaven," is a description of an Eternall
Life, resembling that which we lost in Adam in the point of Marriage.
For seeing Adam, and Eve, if they had not sinned, had lived on Earth
Eternally, in their individuall persons; it is manifest, they should
not continually have procreated their kind. For if Immortals should have
generated, as Mankind doth now; the Earth in a small time, would not
have been able to afford them a place to stand on. The Jews that asked
our Saviour the question, whose wife the woman that had married many
brothers, should be, in the resurrection, knew not what were the
consequences of Immortality; that there shal be no Generation, and
consequently no marriage, no more than there is Marriage, or generation
among the Angels. The comparison between that Eternall life which Adam
lost, and our Saviour by his Victory over death hath recovered; holdeth
also in this, that as Adam lost Eternall Life by his sin, and yet lived
after it for a time; so the faithful Christian hath recovered Eternal
Life by Christs passion, though he die a natural death, and remaine dead
for a time; namely, till the Resurrection. For as Death is reckoned from
the Condemnation of Adam, not from the Execution; so life is reckoned
from the Absolution, not from the Resurrection of them that are elected
in Christ.




Ascension Into Heaven

That the place wherein men are to live Eternally, after the
Resurrection, is the Heavens, meaning by Heaven, those parts of the
world, which are the most remote from Earth, as where the stars are,
or above the stars, in another Higher Heaven, called Caelum Empyreum,
(whereof there is no mention in Scripture, nor ground in Reason) is not
easily to be drawn from any text that I can find. By the Kingdome of
Heaven, is meant the Kingdome of the King that dwelleth in Heaven; and
his Kingdome was the people of Israel, whom he ruled by the Prophets
his Lieutenants, first Moses, and after him Eleazar, and the Soveraign
Priests, till in the days of Samuel they rebelled, and would have a
mortall man for their King, after the manner of other Nations. And
when our Saviour Christ, by the preaching of his Ministers, shall have
perswaded the Jews to return, and called the Gentiles to his obedience,
then shall there be a new Kingdome of Heaven, because our King shall
then be God, whose Throne is Heaven; without any necessity evident in
the Scripture, that man shall ascend to his happinesse any higher than
Gods Footstool the Earth. On the contrary, we find written (Joh. 3.13.)
that "no man hath ascended into Heaven, but he that came down from
Heaven, even the Son of man, that is in Heaven." Where I observe by the
way, that these words are not, as those which go immediately before, the
words of our Saviour, but of St. John himself; for Christ was then not
in Heaven, but upon the Earth. The like is said of David (Acts 2.34.)
where St. Peter, to prove the Ascension of Christ, using the words of
the Psalmist, (Psal. 16.10.) "Thou wilt not leave my soule in Hell, nor
suffer thine Holy one to see corruption," saith, they were spoken (not
of David, but) of Christ; and to prove it, addeth this Reason, "For
David is not ascended into Heaven." But to this a man may easily answer,
and say, that though their bodies were not to ascend till the generall
day of Judgment, yet their souls were in Heaven as soon as they were
departed from their bodies; which also seemeth to be confirmed by the
words of our Saviour (Luke 20.37,38.) who proving the Resurrection out
of the word of Moses, saith thus, "That the dead are raised, even Moses
shewed, at the bush, when he calleth the Lord, the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. For he is not a God of the Dead,
but of the Living; for they all live to him." But if these words be to
be understood only of the Immortality of the Soul, they prove not at all
that which our Saviour intended to prove, which was the Resurrection
of the Body, that is to say, the Immortality of the Man. Therefore our
Saviour meaneth, that those Patriarchs were Immortall; not by a property
consequent to the essence, and nature of mankind, but by the will of
God, that was pleased of his mere grace, to bestow Eternall Life upon
the faithfull. And though at that time the Patriarchs and many other
faithfull men were Dead, yet as it is in the text, they Lived To God;
that is, they were written in the Book of Life with them that were
absolved of their sinnes, and ordained to Life eternall at the
Resurrection. That the Soul of man is in its own nature Eternall, and
a living Creature independent on the Body; or that any meer man is
Immortall, otherwise than by the Resurrection in the last day, (except
Enos and Elias,) is a doctrine not apparent in Scripture. The whole 14.
Chapter of Job, which is the speech not of his friends, but of himselfe,
is a complaint of this Mortality of Nature; and yet no contradiction of
the Immortality at the Resurrection. "There is hope of a tree," (saith
hee verse 7.) "if it be cast down, Though the root thereof wax old, and
the stock thereof die in the ground, yet when it scenteth the water
it will bud, and bring forth boughes like a Plant. But man dyeth, and
wasteth away, yea, man giveth up the Ghost, and where is he?" and (verse
12.) "man lyeth down, and riseth not, till the heavens be no more." But
when is it, that the heavens shall be no more? St. Peter tells us, that
it is at the generall Resurrection. For in his 2. Epistle, 3. Chapter,
and 7. verse, he saith, that "the Heavens and the Earth that are now,
are reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment, and perdition of
ungodly men," and (verse 12.) "looking for, and hasting to the comming
of God, wherein the Heavens shall be on fire, and shall be dissolved,
and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat. Neverthelesse, we
according to the promise look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein
dwelleth righteousnesse." Therefore where Job saith, man riseth not till
the Heavens be no more; it is all one, as if he had said, the Immortall
Life (and Soule and Life in the Scripture, do usually signifie the same
thing) beginneth not in man, till the Resurrection, and day of Judgment;
and hath for cause, not his specificall nature, and generation; but the
Promise. For St. Peter saies not, "Wee look for new heavens, and a new
earth, (from Nature) but from Promise."

Lastly, seeing it hath been already proved out of divers evident places
of Scripture, in the 35. chapter of this book, that the Kingdom of God
is a Civil Common-wealth, where God himself is Soveraign, by vertue
first of the Old, and since of the New Covenant, wherein he reigneth by
his Vicar, or Lieutenant; the same places do therefore also prove, that
after the comming again of our Saviour in his Majesty, and glory, to
reign actually, and Eternally; the Kingdom of God is to be on Earth. But
because this doctrine (though proved out of places of Scripture not few,
nor obscure) will appear to most men a novelty; I doe but propound
it; maintaining nothing in this, or any other paradox of Religion;
but attending the end of that dispute of the sword, concerning the
Authority, (not yet amongst my Countrey-men decided,) by which all sorts
of doctrine are to bee approved, or rejected; and whose commands, both
in speech, and writing, (whatsoever be the opinions of private men) must
by all men, that mean to be protected by their Laws, be obeyed. For
the points of doctrine concerning the Kingdome (of) God, have so great
influence on the Kingdome of Man, as not to be determined, but by them,
that under God have the Soveraign Power.




The Place After Judgment, Of Those Who Were Never In The Kingdome Of
God, Or Having Been In, Are Cast Out

As the Kingdome of God, and Eternall Life, so also Gods Enemies, and
their Torments after Judgment, appear by the Scripture, to have their
place on Earth. The name of the place, where all men remain till the
Resurrection, that were either buryed, or swallowed up of the Earth, is
usually called in Scripture, by words that signifie Under Ground; which
the Latines read generally Infernus, and Inferni, and the Greeks Hades;
that is to say, a place where men cannot see; and containeth as well the
Grave, as any other deeper place. But for the place of the damned after
the Resurrection, it is not determined, neither in the Old, nor New
Testament, by any note of situation; but onely by the company: as that
it shall bee, where such wicked men were, as God in former times in
extraordinary, and miraculous manner, had destroyed from off the face of
the Earth: As for Example, that they are in Inferno, in Tartarus, or in
the bottomelesse pit; because Corah, Dathan, and Abirom, were swallowed
up alive into the earth. Not that the Writers of the Scripture would
have us beleeve, there could be in the globe of the Earth, which is
not only finite, but also (compared to the height of the Stars) of no
considerable magnitude, a pit without a bottome; that is, a hole of
infinite depth, such as the Greeks in their Daemonologie (that is to
say, in their doctrine concerning Daemons,) and after them, the Romans
called Tartarus; of which Virgill sayes,

    Bis patet in præceps, tantem tendítque sub umbras,
    Quantus ad æthereum cœli suspectus Olympum:

for that is a thing the proportion of Earth to Heaven cannot bear: but
that wee should beleeve them there, indefinitely, where those men are,
on whom God inflicted that Exemplary punnishment.




The Congregation Of Giants

Again, because those mighty men of the Earth, that lived in the time
of Noah, before the floud, (which the Greeks called Heroes, and the
Scripture Giants, and both say, were begotten, by copulation of the
children of God, with the children of men,) were for their wicked life
destroyed by the generall deluge; the place of the Damned, is therefore
also sometimes marked out, by the company of those deceased Giants; as
Proverbs 21.16. "The man that wandreth out of the way of understanding,
shall remain in the congregation of the Giants," and Job 26.5. "Behold
the Giants groan under water, and they that dwell with them." Here
the place of the Damned, is under the water. And Isaiah 14.9. "Hell is
troubled how to meet thee," (that is, the King of Babylon) "and will
displace the Giants for thee:" and here again the place of the Damned,
(if the sense be literall,) is to be under water.




Lake Of Fire

Thirdly, because the Cities of Sodom, and Gomorrah, by the extraordinary
wrath of God, were consumed for their wickednesse with Fire and
Brimstone, and together with them the countrey about made a stinking
bituminous Lake; the place of the Damned is sometimes expressed by
Fire, and a Fiery Lake: as in the Apocalypse ch.21.8. "But the timorous,
incredulous, and abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and
Sorcerers, and Idolators, and all Lyars, shall have their part in the
Lake that burneth with Fire, and Brimstone; which is the second Death."
So that it is manifest, that Hell Fire, which is here expressed by
Metaphor, from the reall Fire of Sodome, signifieth not any certain
kind, or place of Torment; but is to be taken indefinitely, for
Destruction, as it is in the 20. Chapter, at the 14. verse; where it is
said, that "Death and Hell were cast into the Lake of Fire;" that is
to say, were abolished, and destroyed; as if after the day of Judgment,
there shall be no more Dying, nor no more going into Hell; that is, no
more going to Hades (from which word perhaps our word Hell is derived,)
which is the same with no more Dying.




Utter Darknesse

Fourthly, from the Plague of Darknesse inflicted on the Egyptians, of
which it is written (Exod. 10.23.) "They saw not one another, neither
rose any man from his place for three days; but all the Children of
Israel had light in their dwellings;" the place of the wicked after
Judgment, is called Utter Darknesse, or (as it is in the originall)
Darknesse Without. And so it is expressed (Mat. 22.13.) where the King
commandeth his Servants, "to bind hand and foot the man that had not
on his Wedding garment, and to cast him out," Eis To Skotos To Exoteron,
Externall Darknesse, or Darknesse Without: which though translated Utter
Darknesse, does not signifie How Great, but Where that darknesse is to
be; namely, Without The Habitation of Gods Elect.




Gehenna, And Tophet

Lastly, whereas there was a place neer Jerusalem, called the Valley of
the Children of Hinnon; in a part whereof, called Tophet, the Jews had
committed most grievous Idolatry, sacrificing their children to the
Idol Moloch; and wherein also God had afflicted his enemies with most
grievous punishments; and wherein Josias had burnt the Priests of Moloch
upon their own Altars, as appeareth at large in the 2 of Kings chap. 23.
the place served afterwards, to receive the filth, and garbage which was
carried thither, out of the City; and there used to be fires made, from
time to time, to purifie the aire, and take away the stench of Carrion.
From this abominable place, the Jews used ever after to call the place
of the Damned, by the name of Gehenna, or Valley of Hinnon. And this
Gehenna, is that word, which is usually now translated HELL; and
from the fires from time to time there burning, we have the notion of
Everlasting, and Unquenchable Fire.




Of The Literall Sense Of The Scripture Concerning Hell

Seeing now there is none, that so interprets the Scripture, as that
after the day of Judgment, the wicked are all Eternally to be punished
in the Valley of Hinnon; or that they shall so rise again, as to be ever
after under ground, or under water; or that after the Resurrection, they
shall no more see one another; nor stir from one place to another; it
followeth, me thinks, very necessarily, that that which is thus said
concerning Hell Fire, is spoken metaphorically; and that therefore there
is a proper sense to bee enquired after, (for of all Metaphors there is
some reall ground, that may be expressed in proper words) both of the
Place of Hell, and the nature of Hellish Torment, and Tormenters.




Satan, Devill, Not Proper Names, But Appellatives

And first for the Tormenters, wee have their nature, and properties,
exactly and properly delivered by the names of, The Enemy, or Satan;
The Accuser, or Diabolus; The Destroyer, or Abbadon. Which significant
names, Satan, Devill, Abbadon, set not forth to us any Individuall
person, as proper names use to doe; but onely an office, or quality;
and are therefore Appellatives; which ought not to have been left
untranslated, as they are, in the Latine, and Modern Bibles; because
thereby they seem to be the proper names of Daemons; and men are the
more easily seduced to beleeve the doctrine of Devills; which at that
time was the Religion of the Gentiles, and contrary to that of Moses,
and of Christ.

And because by the Enemy, the Accuser, and Destroyer, is meant, the
Enemy of them that shall be in the Kingdome of God; therefore if the
Kingdome of God after the Resurrection, bee upon the Earth, (as in the
former Chapter I have shewn by Scripture it seems to be,) The Enemy,
and his Kingdome must be on Earth also. For so also was it, in the time
before the Jews had deposed God. For Gods Kingdome was in Palestine;
and the Nations round about, were the Kingdomes of the Enemy; and
consequently by Satan, is meant any Earthly Enemy of the Church.




Torments Of Hell

The Torments of Hell, are expressed sometimes, by "weeping, and gnashing
of teeth," as Mat. 8.12. Sometimes, by "the worm of Conscience;" as
Isa.66.24. and Mark 9.44, 46, 48; sometimes, by Fire, as in the place
now quoted, "where the worm dyeth not, and the fire is not quenched,"
and many places beside: sometimes by "Shame, and contempt," as Dan.
12.2. "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth, shall
awake; some to Everlasting life; and some to shame, and everlasting
contempt." All which places design metaphorically a grief, and
discontent of mind, from the sight of that Eternall felicity in others,
which they themselves through their own incredulity, and disobedience
have lost. And because such felicity in others, is not sensible but by
comparison with their own actuall miseries; it followeth that they are
to suffer such bodily paines, and calamities, as are incident to those,
who not onely live under evill and cruell Governours, but have also for
Enemy, the Eternall King of the Saints, God Almighty. And amongst these
bodily paines, is to be reckoned also to every one of the wicked a
second Death. For though the Scripture bee clear for an universall
Resurrection; yet wee do not read, that to any of the Reprobate is
promised an Eternall life. For whereas St. Paul (1 Cor. 15.42, 43.) to
the question concerning what bodies men shall rise with again, saith,
that "the body is sown in corruption, and is raised in incorruption; It
is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weaknesse, it
is raised in power;" Glory and Power cannot be applyed to the bodies of
the wicked: Nor can the name of Second Death, bee applyed to those
that can never die but once: And although in Metaphoricall speech, a
Calamitous life Everlasting, may bee called an Everlasting Death yet it
cannot well be understood of a Second Death. The fire prepared for the
wicked, is an Everlasting Fire: that is to say, the estate wherein
no man can be without torture, both of body and mind, after the
Resurrection, shall endure for ever; and in that sense the Fire shall
be unquenchable, and the torments Everlasting: but it cannot thence be
inferred, that hee who shall be cast into that fire, or be tormented
with those torments, shall endure, and resist them so, as to be
eternally burnt, and tortured, and yet never be destroyed, nor die. And
though there be many places that affirm Everlasting Fire, and Torments
(into which men may be cast successively one after another for ever;)
yet I find none that affirm there shall bee an Eternall Life therein of
any individuall person; but on the contrary, an Everlasting Death, which
is the Second Death: (Apoc. 20. 13,14.) "For after Death, and the Grave
shall have delivered up the dead which were in them, and every man be
judged according to his works; Death and the Grave shall also be cast
into the Lake of Fire. This is the Second Death." Whereby it is
evident, that there is to bee a Second Death of every one that shall bee
condemned at the day of Judgement, after which hee shall die no more.




The Joyes Of Life Eternall, And Salvation The Same Thing,
Salvation From Sin, And From Misery, All One

The joyes of Life Eternall, are in Scripture comprehended all under the
name of SALVATION, or Being Saved. To be saved, is to be secured, either
respectively, against speciall Evills, or absolutely against all Evill,
comprehending Want, Sicknesse, and Death it self. And because man
was created in a condition Immortall, not subject to corruption, and
consequently to nothing that tendeth to the dissolution of his nature;
and fell from that happinesse by the sin of Adam; it followeth, that
to be Saved From Sin, is to be saved from all the Evill, and Calamities
that Sinne hath brought upon us. And therefore in the Holy Scripture,
Remission of Sinne, and Salvation from Death and Misery, is the same
thing, as it appears by the words of our Saviour, who having cured a man
sick of the Palsey, by saying, (Mat. 9.2.) "Son be of good cheer, thy
Sins be forgiven thee;" and knowing that the Scribes took for blasphemy,
that a man should pretend to forgive Sins, asked them (v.5.) "whether
it were easier to say, Thy Sinnes be forgiven thee, or, Arise and walk;"
signifying thereby, that it was all one, as to the saving of the sick,
to say, "Thy Sins are forgiven," and "Arise and walk;" and that he used
that form of speech, onely to shew he had power to forgive Sins. And
it is besides evident in reason, that since Death and Misery, were the
punishments of Sin, the discharge of Sinne, must also be a discharge
of Death and Misery; that is to say, Salvation absolute, such as the
faithfull are to enjoy after the day of Judgment, by the power, and
favour of Jesus Christ, who for that cause is called our SAVIOUR.

Concerning Particular Salvations, such as are understood, 1 Sam. 14.39.
"as the Lord liveth that saveth Israel," that is, from their temporary
enemies, and 2 Sam. 22.4. "Thou art my Saviour, thou savest me from
violence;" and 2 Kings 13.5. "God gave the Israelites a Saviour, and
so they were delivered from the hand of the Assyrians," and the like,
I need say nothing; there being neither difficulty, nor interest, to
corrupt the interpretation of texts of that kind.




The Place Of Eternall Salvation

But concerning the Generall Salvation, because it must be in the
Kingdome of Heaven, there is great difficulty concerning the Place.
On one side, by Kingdome (which is an estate ordained by men for their
perpetuall security against enemies, and want) it seemeth that this
Salvation should be on Earth. For by Salvation is set forth unto us,
a glorious Reign of our King, by Conquest; not a safety by Escape:
and therefore there where we look for Salvation, we must look also
for Triumph; and before Triumph, for Victory; and before Victory, for
Battell; which cannot well be supposed, shall be in Heaven. But how good
soever this reason may be, I will not trust to it, without very evident
places of Scripture. The state of Salvation is described at large,
Isaiah, 33. ver. 20,21,22,23,24.

"Look upon Zion, the City of our solemnities, thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down;
not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any
of the cords thereof be broken.

But there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers, and
streams; wherein shall goe no Gally with oares; neither shall gallant
ship passe thereby.

For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our
King, he will save us.

Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their mast;
they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil
divided; the lame take the prey.

And the Inhabitant shall not say, I am sicke; the people that shall
dwell therein shall be forgiven their Iniquity."

In which words wee have the place from whence Salvation is to proceed,
"Jerusalem, a quiet habitation;" the Eternity of it, "a tabernacle that
shall not be taken down," &c. The Saviour of it, "the Lord, their Judge,
their Lawgiver, their King, he will save us;" the Salvation, "the Lord
shall be to them as a broad mote of swift waters," &c. the condition of
their Enemies, "their tacklings are loose, their masts weake, the
lame shal take the spoil of them." The condition of the Saved,
"The Inhabitants shall not say, I am sick:" And lastly, all this is
comprehended in Forgivenesse of sin, "The people that dwell therein
shall be forgiven their iniquity." By which it is evident, that
Salvation shall be on Earth, then, when God shall reign, (at the coming
again of Christ) in Jerusalem; and from Jerusalem shall proceed the
Salvation of the Gentiles that shall be received into Gods Kingdome; as
is also more expressely declared by the same Prophet, Chap. 66.20, 21.
"And they," (that is, the Gentiles who had any Jew in bondage) "shall
bring all your brethren, for an offering to the Lord, out of all
nations, upon horses, and in charets, and in litters, and upon mules,
and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain, Jerusalem, saith the Lord,
as the Children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessell into
the House of the Lord. And I will also take of them for Priests and for
Levites, saith the Lord:" Whereby it is manifest, that the chief seat of
Gods Kingdome (which is the Place, from whence the Salvation of us that
were Gentiles, shall proceed) shall be Jerusalem; And the same is also
confirmed by our Saviour, in his discourse with the woman of Samaria,
concerning the place of Gods worship; to whom he saith, John 4.22. that
the Samaritans worshipped they know not what, but the Jews worship what
they knew, "For Salvation is of the Jews (Ex Judais, that is, begins at
the Jews): as if he should say, you worship God, but know not by whom
he wil save you, as we doe, that know it shall be one of the tribe
of Judah, a Jew, not a Samaritan. And therefore also the woman not
impertinently answered him again, "We know the Messias shall come." So
that which our saviour saith, "Salvation is from the Jews," is the
same that Paul sayes (Rom. 1.16,17.) "The Gospel is the power of God to
Salvation to every one that beleeveth; To the Jew first, and also to the
Greek. For therein is the righteousnesse of God revealed from faith to
faith;" from the faith of the Jew, to the faith of the Gentile. In
the like sense the Prophet Joel describing the day of Judgment, (chap.
2.30,31.) that God would "shew wonders in heaven, and in earth, bloud,
and fire, and pillars of smoak. The Sun should be turned to darknesse,
and the Moon into bloud, before the great and terrible day of the Lord
come," he addeth verse 32. "and it shall come to passe, that whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. For in Mount Zion,
and in Jerusalem shall be Salvation." And Obadiah verse 17 saith
the same, "Upon Mount Zion shall be Deliverance; and there shall be
holinesse, and the house of Jacob shall possesse their possessions,"
that is, the possessions of the Heathen, which possessions he expresseth
more particularly in the following verses, by the Mount of Esau, the
Land of the Philistines, the Fields of Ephraim, of Samaria, Gilead, and
the Cities of the South, and concludes with these words, "the Kingdom
shall be the Lords." All these places are for Salvation, and the
Kingdome of God (after the day of Judgement) upon Earth. On the other
side, I have not found any text that can probably be drawn, to prove
any Ascension of the Saints into Heaven; that is to say, into any Coelum
Empyreum, or other aetheriall Region; saving that it is called the
Kingdome of Heaven; which name it may have, because God, that was King
of the Jews, governed them by his commands, sent to Moses by Angels from
Heaven, to reduce them to their obedience; and shall send him thence
again, to rule both them, and all other faithfull men, from the day of
Judgment, Everlastingly: or from that, that the Throne of this our Great
King is in Heaven; whereas the Earth is but his Footstoole. But that the
Subjects of God should have any place as high as his throne, or higher
than his Footstoole, it seemeth not sutable to the dignity of a King,
nor can I find any evident text for it in holy Scripture.

From this that hath been said of the Kingdom of God, and of Salvation,
it is not hard to interpret, what is meant by the WORLD TO COME. There
are three worlds mentioned in Scripture, the Old World, the Present
World, and the World to Come. Of the first, St. Peter speaks, (2 Pet.
2.5.) "If God spared not the Old World, but saved Noah the eighth
person, a Preacher of righteousnesse, bringing the flood upon the world
of the ungodly," &c. So the First World, was from Adam to the generall
Flood. Of the present World, our Saviour speaks (John 18.36.) "My
Kingdome is not of this World." For he came onely to teach men the way
of Salvation, and to renew the Kingdome of his Father, by his doctrine.
Of the World to come, St. Peter speaks, (2 Pet. 3. 13.) "Neverthelesse
we according to his promise look for new Heavens, and a new Earth." This
is that WORLD, wherein Christ coming down from Heaven, in the clouds,
with great power, and glory, shall send his Angels, and shall gather
together his elect, from the four winds, and from the uttermost parts
of the Earth, and thence forth reign over them, (under his Father)
Everlastingly.




Redemption

Salvation of a sinner, supposeth a precedent REDEMPTION; for he that is
once guilty of Sin, is obnoxious to the Penalty of the same; and must
pay (or some other for him) such Ransome, as he that is offended, and
has him in his power, shall require. And seeing the person offended, is
Almighty God, in whose power are all things; such Ransome is to be paid
before Salvation can be acquired, as God hath been pleased to require.
By this Ransome, is not intended a satisfaction for Sin, equivalent to
the Offence, which no sinner for himselfe, nor righteous man can ever be
able to make for another; The dammage a man does to another, he may make
amends for by restitution, or recompence, but sin cannot be taken
away by recompence; for that were to make the liberty to sin, a thing
vendible. But sins may bee pardoned to the repentant, either Gratis, or
upon such penalty, as God is pleased to accept. That which God usually
accepted in the Old Testament, was some Sacrifice, or Oblation. To
forgive sin is not an act of Injustice, though the punishment have
been threatned. Even amongst men, though the promise of Good, bind the
promiser; yet threats, that is to say, promises, of Evill, bind them
not; much lesse shall they bind God, who is infinitely more mercifull
then men. Our Saviour Christ therefore to Redeem us, did not in that
sense satisfie for the Sins of men, as that his Death, of its own
vertue, could make it unjust in God to punish sinners with Eternall
death; but did make that Sacrifice, and Oblation of himself, at his
first coming, which God was pleased to require, for the Salvation at his
second coming, of such as in the mean time should repent, and beleeve in
him. And though this act of our Redemption, be not alwaies in Scripture
called a Sacrifice, and Oblation, but sometimes a Price, yet by Price
we are not to understand any thing, by the value whereof, he could claim
right to a pardon for us, from his offended Father, but that Price which
God the Father was pleased in mercy to demand.



CHAPTER XXXIX. OF THE SIGNIFICATION IN SCRIPTURE OF THE WORD CHURCH




Church The Lords House

The word Church, (Ecclesia) signifieth in the Books of Holy Scripture
divers things. Sometimes (though not often) it is taken for Gods House,
that is to say, for a Temple, wherein Christians assemble to perform
holy duties publiquely; as, 1 Cor. 14. ver. 34. "Let your women keep
silence in the Churches:" but this is Metaphorically put, for the
Congregation there assembled; and hath been since used for the
Edifice it self, to distinguish between the Temples of Christians, and
Idolaters. The Temple of Jerusalem was Gods House, and the House of
Prayer; and so is any Edifice dedicated by Christians to the worship of
Christ, Christs House: and therefore the Greek Fathers call it Kuriake,
The Lords House; and thence, in our language it came to be called Kyrke,
and Church.




Ecclesia Properly What

Church (when not taken for a House) signifieth the same that Ecclesia
signified in the Grecian Common-wealths; that is to say, a Congregation,
or an Assembly of Citizens, called forth, to hear the Magistrate speak
unto them; and which in the Common-wealth of Rome was called Concio, as
he that spake was called Ecclesiastes, and Concionator. And when they
were called forth by lawfull Authority, (Acts 19.39.) it was Ecclesia
Legitima, a Lawfull Church, Ennomos Ecclesia. But when they were excited
by tumultuous, and seditious clamor, then it was a confused Church,
Ecclesia Sugkechumene.

It is taken also sometimes for the men that have right to be of the
Congregation, though not actually assembled; that is to say, for the
whole multitude of Christian men, how far soever they be dispersed: as
(Act. 8.3.) where it is said, that "Saul made havock of the Church:" And
in this sense is Christ said to be Head of the Church. And sometimes for
a certain part of Christians, as (Col. 4.15.) "Salute the Church that is
in his house." Sometimes also for the Elect onely; as (Ephes. 5.27.) "A
Glorious Church, without spot, or wrinkle, holy, and without blemish;"
which is meant of the Church Triumphant, or, Church To Come. Sometimes,
for a Congregation assembled, of professors of Christianity, whether
their profession be true, or counterfeit, as it is understood, Mat.
18.17. where it is said, "Tell it to the Church, and if hee neglect to
hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Gentile, or Publican."




In What Sense The Church Is One Person Church Defined

And in this last sense only it is that the Church can be taken for one
Person; that is to say, that it can be said to have power to will, to
pronounce, to command, to be obeyed, to make laws, or to doe any other
action whatsoever; For without authority from a lawfull Congregation,
whatsoever act be done in a concourse of people, it is the particular
act of every one of those that were present, and gave their aid to the
performance of it; and not the act of them all in grosse, as of one
body; much lesse that act of them that were absent, or that being
present, were not willing it should be done. According to this sense, I
define a CHURCH to be, "A company of men professing Christian Religion,
united in the person of one Soveraign; at whose command they ought to
assemble, and without whose authority they ought not to assemble." And
because in all Common-wealths, that Assembly, which is without warrant
from the Civil Soveraign, is unlawful; that Church also, which is
assembled in any Common-wealth, that hath forbidden them to assemble, is
an unlawfull Assembly.




A Christian Common-wealth, And A Church All One

It followeth also, that there is on Earth, no such universall Church as
all Christians are bound to obey; because there is no power on Earth, to
which all other Common-wealths are subject: There are Christians, in
the Dominions of severall Princes and States; but every one of them
is subject to that Common-wealth, whereof he is himself a member; and
consequently, cannot be subject to the commands of any other Person.
And therefore a Church, such as one as is capable to Command, to Judge,
Absolve, Condemn, or do any other act, is the same thing with a Civil
Common-wealth, consisting of Christian men; and is called a Civill
State, for that the subjects of it are Men; and a Church, for that the
subjects thereof are Christians. Temporall and Spirituall Government,
are but two words brought into the world, to make men see double, and
mistake their Lawfull Soveraign. It is true, that the bodies of the
faithfull, after the Resurrection shall be not onely Spirituall, but
Eternall; but in this life they are grosse, and corruptible. There
is therefore no other Government in this life, neither of State, nor
Religion, but Temporall; nor teaching of any doctrine, lawfull to any
Subject, which the Governour both of the State, and of the Religion,
forbiddeth to be taught: And that Governor must be one; or else there
must needs follow Faction, and Civil war in the Common-wealth, between
the Church and State; between Spiritualists, and Temporalists; between
the Sword Of Justice, and the Shield Of Faith; and (which is more) in
every Christian mans own brest, between the Christian, and the Man.
The Doctors of the Church, are called Pastors; so also are Civill
Soveraignes: But if Pastors be not subordinate one to another, so
as that there may bee one chief Pastor, men will be taught contrary
Doctrines, whereof both may be, and one must be false. Who that one
chief Pastor is, according to the law of Nature, hath been already
shewn; namely, that it is the Civill Soveraign; And to whom the
Scripture hath assigned that Office, we shall see in the Chapters
following.




CHAPTER XL OF THE RIGHTS OF THE KINGDOME OF GOD, IN ABRAHAM, MOSES,
HIGH PRIESTS, AND THE KINGS OF JUDAH




The Soveraign Rights Of Abraham

The Father of the Faithfull, and first in the Kingdome of God by
Covenant, was Abraham. For with him was the Covenant first made; wherein
he obliged himself, and his seed after him, to acknowledge and obey the
commands of God; not onely such, as he could take notice of, (as Morall
Laws,) by the light of Nature; but also such, as God should in speciall
manner deliver to him by Dreams and Visions. For as to the Morall law,
they were already obliged, and needed not have been contracted withall,
by promise of the Land of Canaan. Nor was there any Contract, that could
adde to, or strengthen the Obligation, by which both they, and all
men else were bound naturally to obey God Almighty: And therefore the
Covenant which Abraham made with God, was to take for the Commandement
of God, that which in the name of God was commanded him, in a Dream, or
Vision, and to deliver it to his family, and cause them to observe the
same.




Abraham Had The Sole Power Of Ordering The Religion Of His Own People

In this Contract of God with Abraham, wee may observe three points of
important consequence in the government of Gods people. First, that at
the making of this Covenant, God spake onely to Abraham; and therefore
contracted not with any of his family, or seed, otherwise then as their
wills (which make the essence of all Covenants) were before the Contract
involved in the will of Abraham; who was therefore supposed to have had
a lawfull power, to make them perform all that he covenanted for them.
According whereunto (Gen 18.18, 19.) God saith, "All the Nations of the
Earth shall be blessed in him, For I know him that he will command his
children and his houshold after him, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord." From whence may be concluded this first point, that they to
whom God hath not spoken immediately, are to receive the positive
commandements of God, from their Soveraign; as the family and seed of
Abraham did from Abraham their Father, and Lord, and Civill Soveraign.
And Consequently in every Common-wealth, they who have no supernaturall
Revelation to the contrary, ought to obey the laws of their own
Soveraign, in the externall acts and profession of Religion. As for the
inward Thought, and beleef of men, which humane Governours can take no
notice of, (for God onely knoweth the heart) they are not voluntary, nor
the effect of the laws, but of the unrevealed will, and of the power of
God; and consequently fall not under obligation.




No Pretence Of Private Spirit Against The Religion Of Abraham

From whence proceedeth another point, that it was not unlawfull for
Abraham, when any of his Subjects should pretend Private Vision, or
Spirit, or other Revelation from God, for the countenancing of any
doctrine which Abraham should forbid, or when they followed, or adhered
to any such pretender, to punish them; and consequently that it is
lawfull now for the Soveraign to punish any man that shall oppose his
Private Spirit against the Laws: For hee hath the same place in the
Common-wealth, that Abraham had in his own Family.




Abraham Sole Judge, And Interpreter Of What God Spake

There ariseth also from the same, a third point; that as none but
Abraham in his family, so none but the Soveraign in a Christian
Common-wealth, can take notice what is, or what is not the Word of God.
For God spake onely to Abraham; and it was he onely, that was able
to know what God said, and to interpret the same to his family: And
therefore also, they that have the place of Abraham in a Common-wealth,
are the onely Interpreters of what God hath spoken.




The Authority Of Moses Whereon Grounded

The same Covenant was renewed with Isaac; and afterwards with Jacob; but
afterwards no more, till the Israelites were freed from the Egyptians,
and arrived at the Foot of Mount Sinai: and then it was renewed by Moses
(as I have said before, chap. 35.) in such manner, as they became from
that time forward the Peculiar Kingdome of God; whose Lieutenant was
Moses, for his owne time; and the succession to that office was setled
upon Aaron, and his heirs after him, to bee to God a Sacerdotall
Kingdome for ever.

By this constitution, a Kingdome is acquired to God. But seeing Moses
had no authority to govern the Israelites, as a successor to the right
of Abraham, because he could not claim it by inheritance; it appeareth
not as yet, that the people were obliged to take him for Gods
Lieutenant, longer than they beleeved that God spake unto him. And
therefore his authority (notwithstanding the Covenant they made with
God) depended yet merely upon the opinion they had of his Sanctity,
and of the reality of his Conferences with God, and the verity of his
Miracles; which opinion coming to change, they were no more obliged to
take any thing for the law of God, which he propounded to them in Gods
name. We are therefore to consider, what other ground there was, of
their obligation to obey him. For it could not be the commandement of
God that could oblige them; because God spake not to them immediately,
but by the mediation of Moses Himself; And our Saviour saith of himself,
(John 5. 31.) "If I bear witnesse of my self, my witnesse is not true,"
much lesse if Moses bear witnesse of himselfe, (especially in a claim of
Kingly power over Gods people) ought his testimony to be received. His
authority therefore, as the authority of all other Princes, must be
grounded on the Consent of the People, and their Promise to obey him.
And so it was: for "the people" (Exod. 20.18.) "when they saw the
Thunderings, and the Lightnings, and the noyse of the Trumpet, and the
mountaine smoaking, removed, and stood a far off. And they said unto
Moses, speak thou with us, and we will hear, but let not God speak with
us lest we die." Here was their promise of obedience; and by this it was
they obliged themselves to obey whatsoever he should deliver unto them
for the Commandement of God.




Moses Was (Under God) Soveraign Of The Jews, All His Own Time, Though
Aaron Had The Priesthood

And notwithstanding the Covenant constituted a Sacerdotall Kingdome,
that is to say, a Kingdome hereditary to Aaron; yet that is to be
understood of the succession, after Moses should bee dead. For
whosoever ordereth, and establisheth the Policy, as first founder of
a Common-wealth (be it Monarchy, Aristocracy, or Democracy) must needs
have Soveraign Power over the people all the while he is doing of it.
And that Moses had that power all his own time, is evidently affirmed in
the Scripture. First, in the text last before cited, because the people
promised obedience, not to Aaron but to him. Secondly, (Exod. 24.1, 2.)
"And God said unto Moses, Come up unto the Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadab
and Abihu, and seventy of the Elders of Israel. And Moses alone shall
come neer the Lord, but they shall not come nigh, neither shall the
people goe up with him." By which it is plain, that Moses who was alone
called up to God, (and not Aaron, nor the other Priests, nor the Seventy
Elders, nor the People who were forbidden to come up) was alone he, that
represented to the Israelites the Person of God; that is to say, was
their sole Soveraign under God. And though afterwards it be said (verse
9.) "Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the
Elders of Israel, and they saw the God of Israel, and there was under
his feet, as it were a paved work of a saphire stone," &c. yet this was
not till after Moses had been with God before, and had brought to
the people the words which God had said to him. He onely went for the
businesse of the people; the others, as the Nobles of his retinue, were
admitted for honour to that speciall grace, which was not allowed to
the people; which was, (as in the verse after appeareth) to see God and
live. "God laid not his hand upon them, they saw God and did eat and
drink" (that is, did live), but did not carry any commandement from
him to the people. Again, it is every where said, "The Lord spake unto
Moses," as in all other occasions of Government; so also in the ordering
of the Ceremonies of Religion, contained in the 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
and 31 Chapters of Exodus, and throughout Leviticus: to Aaron seldome.
The Calfe that Aaron made, Moses threw into the fire. Lastly, the
question of the Authority of Aaron, by occasion of his and Miriams
mutiny against Moses, was (Numbers 12.) judged by God himself for Moses.
So also in the question between Moses, and the People, when Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, and two hundred and fifty Princes of the Assembly
"gathered themselves together" (Numbers 16. 3) "against Moses, and
against Aaron, and said unto them, ‘Ye take too much upon you, seeing
all the congregation are Holy, every one of them, and the Lord is
amongst them, why lift you up your selves above the congregation of the
Lord?’" God caused the Earth to swallow Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with
their wives and children alive, and consumed those two hundred and fifty
Princes with fire. Therefore neither Aaron, nor the People, nor any
Aristocracy of the chief Princes of the People, but Moses alone had next
under God the Soveraignty over the Israelites: And that not onely in
causes of Civill Policy, but also of Religion; For Moses onely spake
with God, and therefore onely could tell the People, what it was that
God required at their hands. No man upon pain of death might be so
presumptuous as to approach the Mountain where God talked with Moses.
"Thou shalt set bounds" (saith the Lord, Exod 19. 12.) "to the people
round about, and say, Take heed to your selves that you goe not up into
the Mount, or touch the border of it; whosoever toucheth the Mount shall
surely be put to death." and again (verse 21.) "Get down, charge the
people, lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze." Out of which we
may conclude, that whosoever in a Christian Common-wealth holdeth the
place of Moses, is the sole Messenger of God, and Interpreter of
his Commandements. And according hereunto, no man ought in the
interpretation of the Scripture to proceed further then the bounds which
are set by their severall Soveraigns. For the Scriptures since God now
speaketh in them, are the Mount Sinai; the bounds whereof are the Laws
of them that represent Gods Person on Earth. To look upon them and
therein to behold the wondrous works of God, and learn to fear him is
allowed; but to interpret them; that is, to pry into what God saith to
him whom he appointeth to govern under him, and make themselves Judges
whether he govern as God commandeth him, or not, is to transgresse the
bounds God hath set us, and to gaze upon God irreverently.




All Spirits Were Subordinate To The Spirit Of Moses

There was no Prophet in the time of Moses, nor pretender to the Spirit
of God, but such as Moses had approved, and Authorized. For there were
in his time but Seventy men, that are said to Prophecy by the Spirit of
God, and these were of all Moses his election; concerning whom God saith
to Moses (Numb. 11.16.) "Gather to mee Seventy of the Elders of Israel,
whom thou knowest to be the Elders of the People." To these God imparted
his Spirit; but it was not a different Spirit from that of Moses; for
it is said (verse 25.) "God came down in a cloud, and took of the Spirit
that was upon Moses, and gave it to the Seventy Elders." But as I have
shewn before (chap. 36.) by Spirit, is understood the Mind; so that the
sense of the place is no other than this, that God endued them with
a mind conformable, and subordinate to that of Moses, that they might
Prophecy, that is to say, speak to the people in Gods name, in such
manner, as to set forward (as Ministers of Moses, and by his authority)
such doctrine as was agreeable to Moses his doctrine. For they were but
Ministers; and when two of them Prophecyed in the Camp, it was thought
a new and unlawfull thing; and as it is in the 27. and 28. verses of
the same Chapter, they were accused of it, and Joshua advised Moses to
forbid them, as not knowing that it was by Moses his Spirit that they
Prophecyed. By which it is manifest, that no Subject ought to pretend to
Prophecy, or to the Spirit, in opposition to the doctrine established by
him, whom God hath set in the place of Moses.




After Moses The Soveraignty Was In The High Priest

Aaron being dead, and after him also Moses, the Kingdome, as being a
Sacerdotall Kingdome, descended by vertue of the Covenant, to Aarons
Son, Eleazar the High Priest: And God declared him (next under himself)
for Soveraign, at the same time that he appointed Joshua for the
Generall of their Army. For thus God saith expressely (Numb. 27.21.)
concerning Joshua; "He shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, who shall
ask counsell for him, before the Lord, at his word shall they goe out,
and at his word they shall come in, both he, and all the Children of
Israel with him:" Therefore the Supreme Power of making War and Peace,
was in the Priest. The Supreme Power of Judicature belonged also to
the High Priest: For the Book of the Law was in their keeping; and the
Priests and Levites onely were the subordinate Judges in causes Civill,
as appears in Deut. 17.8, 9, 10. And for the manner of Gods worship,
there was never doubt made, but that the High Priest till the time
of Saul, had the Supreme Authority. Therefore the Civill and
Ecclesiasticall Power were both joined together in one and the same
person, the High Priest; and ought to bee so, in whosoever governeth by
Divine Right; that is, by Authority immediate from God.




Of The Soveraign Power Between The Time Of Joshua And Of Saul

After the death of Joshua, till the time of Saul, the time between is
noted frequently in the Book of Judges, "that there was in those dayes
no King in Israel;" and sometimes with this addition, that "every
man did that which was right in his own eyes." By which is to bee
understood, that where it is said, "there was no King," is meant, "there
was no Soveraign Power" in Israel. And so it was, if we consider the
Act, and Exercise of such power. For after the death of Joshua, &
Eleazar, "there arose another generation" (Judges 2.10.) "that knew not
the Lord, nor the works which he had done for Israel, but did evill in
the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim." And the Jews had that quality
which St. Paul noteth, "to look for a sign," not onely before they would
submit themselves to the government of Moses, but also after they had
obliged themselves by their submission. Whereas Signs, and Miracles had
for End to procure Faith, not to keep men from violating it, when they
have once given it; for to that men are obliged by the law of Nature.
But if we consider not the Exercise, but the Right of governing, the
Soveraign power was still in the High Priest. Therefore whatsoever
obedience was yeelded to any of the Judges, (who were men chosen by God
extraordinarily, to save his rebellious subjects out of the hands of
the enemy,) it cannot bee drawn into argument against the Right the High
Priest had to the Soveraign Power, in all matters, both of Policy and
Religion. And neither the Judges, nor Samuel himselfe had an ordinary,
but extraordinary calling to the Government; and were obeyed by the
Israelites, not out of duty, but out of reverence to their favour
with God, appearing in their wisdome, courage, or felicity. Hitherto
therefore the Right of Regulating both the Policy, and the Religion,
were inseparable.




Of The Rights Of The Kings Of Israel

To the Judges, succeeded Kings; And whereas before, all authority, both
in Religion, and Policy, was in the High Priest; so now it was all in
the King. For the Soveraignty over the people, which was before, not
onely by vertue of the Divine Power, but also by a particular pact of
the Israelites in God, and next under him, in the High Priest, as his
Viceregent on earth, was cast off by the People, with the consent of God
himselfe. For when they said to Samuel (1 Sam. 8.5.) "make us a King to
judge us, like all the Nations," they signified that they would no
more bee governed by the commands that should bee laid upon them by the
Priest, in the name of God; but by one that should command them in the
same manner that all other nations were commanded; and consequently in
deposing the High Priest of Royall authority, they deposed that peculiar
Government of God. And yet God consented to it, saying to Samuel (verse
7.) "Hearken unto the voice of the People, in all that they shall say
unto thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected mee,
that I should not reign over them." Having therefore rejected God, in
whose Right the Priests governed, there was no authority left to the
Priests, but such as the King was pleased to allow them; which was
more, or lesse, according as the Kings were good, or evill. And for the
Government of Civill affaires, it is manifest, it was all in the hands
of the King. For in the same Chapter, verse 20. They say they will be
like all the Nations; that their King shall be their Judge, and goe
before them, and fight their battells; that is, he shall have the
whole authority, both in Peace and War. In which is contained also the
ordering of Religion; for there was no other Word of God in that time,
by which to regulate Religion, but the Law of Moses, which was their
Civill Law. Besides, we read (1 Kings 2.27.) that Solomon "thrust out
Abiathar from being Priest before the Lord:" He had therefore authority
over the High Priest, as over any other Subject; which is a great
mark of Supremacy in Religion. And we read also (1 Kings 8.) that hee
dedicated the Temple; that he blessed the People; and that he himselfe
in person made that excellent prayer, used in the Consecrations of all
Churches, and houses of Prayer; which is another great mark of Supremacy
in Religion. Again, we read (2 Kings 22.) that when there was question
concerning the Book of the Law found in the Temple, the same was not
decided by the High Priest, but Josiah sent both him, and others to
enquire concerning it, of Hulda, the Prophetesse; which is another mark
of the Supremacy in Religion. Lastly, wee read (1 Chro. 26.30.) that
David made Hashabiah and his brethren, Hebronites, Officers of Israel
among them Westward, "in all businesse of the Lord, and in the service
of the King." Likewise (verse 32.) that hee made other Hebronites,
"rulers over the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the halfe tribe of
Manasseh" (these were the rest of Israel that dwelt beyond Jordan) "for
every matter pertaining to God, and affairs of the King." Is not this
full Power, both Temporall and Spirituall, as they call it, that would
divide it? To conclude; from the first institution of Gods Kingdome, to
the Captivity, the Supremacy of Religion, was in the same hand with that
of the Civill Soveraignty; and the Priests office after the election of
Saul, was not Magisteriall, but Ministeriall.




The Practice Of Supremacy In Religion, Was Not In The Time Of The Kings,
According To The Right Thereof

Notwithstanding the government both in Policy and Religion, were joined,
first in the High Priests, and afterwards in the Kings, so far forth as
concerned the Right; yet it appeareth by the same Holy History, that the
people understood it not; but there being amongst them a great part, and
probably the greatest part, that no longer than they saw great miracles,
or (which is equivalent to a miracle) great abilities, or great felicity
in the enterprises of their Governours, gave sufficient credit, either
to the fame of Moses, or to the Colloquies between God and the Priests;
they took occasion as oft as their Governours displeased them, by
blaming sometimes the Policy, sometimes the Religion, to change the
Government, or revolt from their Obedience at their pleasure: And from
thence proceeded from time to time the civill troubles, divisions, and
calamities of the Nation. As for example, after the death of Eleazar and
Joshua, the next generation which had not seen the wonders of God, but
were left to their own weak reason, not knowing themselves obliged
by the Covenant of a Sacerdotall Kingdome, regarded no more the
Commandement of the Priest, nor any law of Moses, but did every man that
which was right in his own eyes; and obeyed in Civill affairs, such
men, as from time to time they thought able to deliver them from the
neighbour Nations that oppressed them; and consulted not with God (as
they ought to doe,) but with such men, or women, as they guessed to bee
Prophets by their Praedictions of things to come; and thought they had
an Idol in their Chappel, yet if they had a Levite for their Chaplain,
they made account they worshipped the God of Israel.

And afterwards when they demanded a King, after the manner of the
nations; yet it was not with a design to depart from the worship of God
their King; but despairing of the justice of the sons of Samuel, they
would have a King to judg them in Civill actions; but not that they
would allow their King to change the Religion which they thought was
recommended to them by Moses. So that they alwaies kept in store a
pretext, either of Justice, or Religion, to discharge themselves of
their obedience, whensoever they had hope to prevaile. Samuel was
displeased with the people, for that they desired a King, (for God was
their King already, and Samuel had but an authority under him); yet did
Samuel, when Saul observed not his counsell, in destroying Agag as God
had commanded, anoint another King, namely David, to take the succession
from his heirs. Rehoboam was no Idolater; but when the people thought
him an Oppressor; that Civil pretence carried from him ten Tribes to
Jeroboam an Idolater. And generally through the whole History of the
Kings, as well of Judah, as of Israel, there were Prophets that alwaies
controlled the Kings, for transgressing the Religion; and sometimes also
for Errours of State; (2 Chro. 19. 2.) as Jehosaphat was reproved by
the Prophet Jehu, for aiding the King of Israel against the Syrians;
and Hezekiah, by Isaiah, for shewing his treasures to the Ambassadors of
Babylon. By all which it appeareth, that though the power both of State
and Religion were in the Kings; yet none of them were uncontrolled
in the use of it, but such as were gracious for their own naturall
abilities, or felicities. So that from the practise of those times,
there can no argument be drawn, that the right of Supremacy in Religion
was not in the Kings, unlesse we place it in the Prophets; and conclude,
that because Hezekiah praying to the Lord before the Cherubins, was not
answered from thence, nor then, but afterwards by the Prophet Isaiah,
therefore Isaiah was supreme Head of the Church; or because Josiah
consulted Hulda the Prophetesse, concerning the Book of the Law, that
therefore neither he, nor the High Priest, but Hulda the Prophetesse had
the Supreme authority in matter of Religion; which I thinke is not the
opinion of any Doctor.




After The Captivity The Jews Had No Setled Common-wealth

During the Captivity, the Jews had no Common-wealth at all: And after
their return, though they renewed their Covenant with God, yet there
was no promise made of obedience, neither to Esdras, nor to any other;
And presently after they became subjects to the Greeks (from whose
Customes, and Daemonology, and from the doctrine of the Cabalists,
their Religion became much corrupted): In such sort as nothing can be
gathered from their confusion, both in State and Religion, concerning
the Supremacy in either. And therefore so far forth as concerneth the
Old Testament, we may conclude, that whosoever had the Soveraignty of
the Common-wealth amongst the Jews, the same had also the Supreme
Authority in matter of Gods externall worship; and represented Gods
Person; that is the person of God the Father; though he were not called
by the name of Father, till such time as he sent into the world his Son
Jesus Christ, to redeem mankind from their sins, and bring them into
his Everlasting Kingdome, to be saved for evermore. Of which we are to
speak in the Chapter following.



CHAPTER XLI. OF THE OFFICE OF OUR BLESSED SAVIOUR




Three Parts Of The Office Of Christ

We find in Holy Scripture three parts of the Office of the Messiah: the
first of a Redeemer, or Saviour: The second of a Pastor, Counsellour,
or Teacher, that is, of a Prophet sent from God, to convert such as God
hath elected to Salvation; The third of a King, and Eternall King, but
under his Father, as Moses and the High Priests were in their severall
times. And to these three parts are corespondent three times. For our
Redemption he wrought at his first coming, by the Sacrifice, wherein
he offered up himself for our sinnes upon the Crosse: our conversion
he wrought partly then in his own Person; and partly worketh now by his
Ministers; and will continue to work till his coming again. And after
his coming again, shall begin that his glorious Reign over his elect,
which is to last eternally.




His Office As A Redeemer

To the Office of a Redeemer, that is, of one that payeth the Ransome of
Sin, (which Ransome is Death,) it appertaineth, that he was Sacrificed,
and thereby bare upon his own head, and carryed away from us our
iniquities, in such sort as God had required. Not that the death of one
man, though without sinne, can satisfie for the offences of all men,
in the rigour of Justice, but in the Mercy of God, that ordained such
Sacrifices for sin, as he was pleased in his mercy to accept. In the old
Law (as we may read, Leviticus the 16.) the Lord required, that there
should every year once, bee made an Atonement for the Sins of all
Israel, both Priests, and others; for the doing whereof, Aaron alone was
to sacrifice for himself and the Priests a young Bullock; and for the
rest of the people, he was to receive from them two young Goates, of
which he was to Sacrifice one; but as for the other, which was the Scape
Goat, he was to lay his hands on the head thereof, and by a confession
of the iniquities of the people, to lay them all on that head, and then
by some opportune man, to cause the Goat to be led into the wildernesse,
and there to Escape, and carry away with him the iniquities of the
people. As the Sacrifice of the one Goat was a sufficient (because an
acceptable) price for the Ransome of all Israel; so the death of the
Messiah, is a sufficient price, for the Sins of all mankind, because
there was no more required. Our Saviour Christs sufferings seem to be
here figured, as cleerly, as in the oblation of Isaac, or in any other
type of him in the Old Testament: He was both the sacrificed Goat, and
the Scape Goat; "Hee was oppressed, and he was afflicted (Isa. 53.7.);
he opened not his mouth; he brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a
sheep is dumbe before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth:" Here he
is the Sacrificed Goat. "He hath born our Griefs, (ver.4.) and carried
our sorrows;" And again, (ver. 6.) "the Lord hath laid upon him the
iniquities of us all:" And so he is the Scape Goat. "He was cut off from
the land of the living (ver. 8.) for the transgression of my People:"
There again he is the Sacrificed Goat. And again (ver. 11.) "he shall
bear their sins:" Hee is the Scape Goat. Thus is the Lamb of God
equivalent to both those Goates; sacrificed, in that he dyed; and
escaping, in his Resurrection; being raised opportunely by his Father,
and removed from the habitation of men in his Ascension.




Christs Kingdome Not Of This World

For as much therefore, as he that Redeemeth, hath no title to the Thing
Redeemed, before the Redemption, and Ransome paid; and this Ransome was
the Death of the Redeemer; it is manifest, that our Saviour (as man) was
not King of those that he Redeemed, before hee suffered death; that is,
during that time hee conversed bodily on the Earth. I say, he was not
then King in present, by vertue of the Pact, which the faithfull make
with him in Baptisme; Neverthelesse, by the renewing of their Pact with
God in Baptisme, they were obliged to obey him for King, (under his
Father) whensoever he should be pleased to take the Kingdome upon him.
According whereunto, our Saviour himself expressely saith, (John 18.36.)
"My Kingdome is not of this world." Now seeing the Scripture maketh
mention but of two worlds; this that is now, and shall remain to the day
of Judgment, (which is therefore also called, The Last Day;) and that
which shall bee a new Heaven, and a new Earth; the Kingdome of Christ
is not to begin till the general Resurrection. And that is it which our
Saviour saith, (Mat. 16.27.) "The Son of man shall come in the glory
of his Father, with his Angels; and then he shall reward every man
according to his works." To reward every man according to his works, is
to execute the Office of a King; and this is not to be till he come in
the glory of his Father, with his Angells. When our Saviour saith,
(Mat. 23.2.) "The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat; All therefore
whatsoever they bid you doe, that observe and doe;" hee declareth
plainly, that hee ascribeth Kingly Power, for that time, not to
himselfe, but to them. And so hee hath also, where he saith, (Luke
12.14.) "Who made mee a Judge, or Divider over you?" And (John 12.47.)
"I came not to judge the world, but to save the world." And yet our
Saviour came into this world that hee might bee a King, and a Judge in
the world to come: For hee was the Messiah, that is, the Christ, that
is, the Anointed Priest, and the Soveraign Prophet of God; that is to
say, he was to have all the power that was in Moses the Prophet, in the
High Priests that succeeded Moses, and in the Kings that succeeded the
Priests. And St. John saies expressely (chap. 5. ver. 22.) "The Father
judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to the Son." And this is
not repugnant to that other place, "I came not to judge the world:" for
this is spoken of the world present, the other of the world to come; as
also where it is said, that at the second coming of Christ, (Mat. 19.
28.) "Yee that have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of
man shall sit in the throne of his Glory, yee shall also sit on twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."




The End Of Christs Comming Was To Renew The Covenant Of The Kingdome
Of God, And To Perswade The Elect To Imbrace It, Which Was The Second
Part Of His Office

If then Christ while hee was on Earth, had no Kingdome in this World,
to what end was his first coming? It was to restore unto God, by a new
Covenant, the Kingdome, which being his by the Old Covenant, had been
cut off by the rebellion of the Israelites in the election of Saul.
Which to doe, he was to preach unto them, that he was the Messiah, that
is, the King promised to them by the Prophets; and to offer himselfe in
sacrifice for the sinnes of them that should by faith submit themselves
thereto; and in case the nation generally should refuse him, to call
to his obedience such as should beleeve in him amongst the Gentiles. So
that there are two parts of our Saviours Office during his aboad upon
the Earth; One to Proclaim himself the Christ; and another by Teaching,
and by working of Miracles, to perswade, and prepare men to live so, as
to be worthy of the Immortality Beleevers were to enjoy, at such time as
he should come in majesty, to take possession of his Fathers Kingdome.
And therefore it is, that the time of his preaching, is often by himself
called the Regeneration; which is not properly a Kingdome, and thereby
a warrant to deny obedience to the Magistrates that then were, (for
hee commanded to obey those that sate then in Moses chaire, and to pay
tribute to Caesar;) but onely an earnest of the Kingdome of God that was
to come, to those to whom God had given the grace to be his disciples,
and to beleeve in him; For which cause the Godly are said to bee already
in the Kingdome of Grace, as naturalized in that heavenly Kingdome.




The Preaching Of Christ Not Contrary To The Then Law Of The Jews, Nor
Of Caesar

Hitherto therefore there is nothing done, or taught by Christ, that
tendeth to the diminution of the Civill Right of the Jewes, or of
Caesar. For as touching the Common-wealth which then was amongst
the Jews, both they that bare rule amongst them, that they that were
governed, did all expect the Messiah, and Kingdome of God; which they
could not have done if their Laws had forbidden him (when he came) to
manifest, and declare himself. Seeing therefore he did nothing, but by
Preaching, and Miracles go about to prove himselfe to be that Messiah,
hee did therein nothing against their laws. The Kingdome hee claimed was
to bee in another world; He taught all men to obey in the mean time them
that sate in Moses seat: he allowed them to give Caesar his tribute, and
refused to take upon himselfe to be a Judg. How then could his words,
or actions bee seditious, or tend to the overthrow of their then Civill
Government? But God having determined his sacrifice, for the reduction
of his elect to their former covenanted obedience, for the means,
whereby he would bring the same to effect, made use of their malice,
and ingratitude. Nor was it contrary to the laws of Caesar. For though
Pilate himself (to gratifie the Jews) delivered him to be crucified; yet
before he did so, he pronounced openly, that he found no fault in him:
And put for title of his condemnation, not as the Jews required, "that
he pretended to be King;" but simply, "That hee was King of the Jews;"
and notwithstanding their clamour, refused to alter it; saying, "What I
have written, I have written."




The Third Part Of His Office Was To Be King (Under His Father) Of The
Elect

As for the third part of his Office, which was to be King, I have
already shewn that his Kingdome was not to begin till the Resurrection.
But then he shall be King, not onely as God, in which sense he is
King already, and ever shall be, of all the Earth, in vertue of his
omnipotence; but also peculiarly of his own Elect, by vertue of the
pact they make with him in their Baptisme. And therefore it is, that
our Saviour saith (Mat. 19.28.) that his Apostles should sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel, "When the Son of man shall
sit in the throne of his glory;" whereby he signified that he should
reign then in his humane nature; and (Mat. 16.27.) "The Son of man shall
come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then he shall
reward every man according to his works." The same we may read, Marke
13..26. and 14.26. and more expressely for the time, Luke 22.29, 30. "I
appoint unto you a Kingdome, as my Father hath appointed to mee, that
you may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdome, and sit on thrones
judging the twelve tribes of Israel." By which it is manifest that the
Kingdome of Christ appointed to him by his Father, is not to be before
the Son of Man shall come in Glory, and make his Apostles Judges of
the twelve tribes of Israel. But a man may here ask, seeing there is
no marriage in the Kingdome of Heaven, whether men shall then eat, and
drink; what eating therefore is meant in this place? This is expounded
by our Saviour (John 6.27.) where he saith, "Labour not for the meat
which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting
life, which the Son of man shall give you." So that by eating at Christs
table, is meant the eating of the Tree of Life; that is to say, the
enjoying of Immortality, in the Kingdome of the Son of Man. By which
places, and many more, it is evident, that our Saviours Kingdome is to
bee exercised by him in his humane nature.




Christs Authority In The Kingdome Of God Subordinate To His Father

Again, he is to be King then, no otherwise than as subordinate, or
Viceregent of God the Father, as Moses was in the wildernesse; and as
the High Priests were before the reign of Saul; and as the Kings were
after it. For it is one of the Prophecies concerning Christ, that he
should be like (in Office) to Moses; "I will raise them up a Prophet
(saith the Lord, Deut. 18.18.) from amongst their Brethren like unto
thee, and will put my words into his mouth," and this similitude with
Moses, is also apparent in the actions of our Saviour himself, whilest
he was conversant on Earth. For as Moses chose twelve Princes of the
tribes, to govern under him; so did our Saviour choose twelve Apostles,
who shall sit on twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel;
And as Moses authorized Seventy Elders, to receive the Spirit of God,
and to Prophecy to the people, that is, (as I have said before,) to
speak unto them in the name of God; so our Saviour also ordained seventy
Disciples, to preach his Kingdome, and Salvation to all Nations. And as
when a complaint was made to Moses, against those of the Seventy that
prophecyed in the camp of Israel, he justified them in it, as being
subservient therein to his government; so also our Saviour, when St.
John complained to him of a certain man that cast out Devills in his
name, justified him therein, saying, (Luke 9.50.) "Forbid him not, for
hee that is not against us, is on our part."

Again, our Saviour resembled Moses in the institution of Sacraments,
both of Admission into the Kingdome of God, and of Commemoration of his
deliverance of his Elect from their miserable condition. As the Children
of Israel had for Sacrament of their Reception into the Kingdome of God,
before the time of Moses, the rite of Circumcision, which rite having
been omitted in the Wildernesse, was again restored as soon as they came
into the land of Promise; so also the Jews, before the coming of our
Saviour, had a rite of Baptizing, that is, of washing with water all
those that being Gentiles, embraced the God of Israel. This rite St.
John the Baptist used in the reception of all them that gave their names
to the Christ, whom hee preached to bee already come into the world; and
our Saviour instituted the same for a Sacrament to be taken by all that
beleeved in him. From what cause the rite of Baptisme first proceeded,
is not expressed formally in the Scripture; but it may be probably
thought to be an imitation of the law of Moses, concerning Leprousie;
wherein the Leprous man was commanded to be kept out of the campe of
Israel for a certain time; after which time being judged by the Priest
to be clean, hee was admitted into the campe after a solemne Washing.
And this may therefore bee a type of the Washing in Baptisme; wherein
such men as are cleansed of the Leprousie of Sin by Faith, are received
into the Church with the solemnity of Baptisme. There is another
conjecture drawn from the Ceremonies of the Gentiles, in a certain case
that rarely happens; and that is, when a man that was thought dead,
chanced to recover, other men made scruple to converse with him, as they
would doe to converse with a Ghost, unlesse hee were received again into
the number of men, by Washing, as Children new born were washed from
the uncleannesse of their nativity, which was a kind of new birth. This
ceremony of the Greeks, in the time that Judaea was under the Dominion
of Alexander, and the Greeks his successors, may probably enough have
crept into the Religion of the Jews. But seeing it is not likely our
Saviour would countenance a Heathen rite, it is most likely it proceeded
from the Legall Ceremony of Washing after Leprosie. And for the other
Sacraments, of eating the Paschall Lambe, it is manifestly imitated in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; in which the Breaking of the Bread,
and the pouring out of the Wine, do keep in memory our deliverance from
the Misery of Sin, by Christs Passion, as the eating of the Paschall
Lambe, kept in memory the deliverance of the Jewes out of the Bondage of
Egypt. Seeing therefore the authority of Moses was but subordinate, and
hee but a Lieutenant to God; it followeth, that Christ, whose authority,
as man, was to bee like that of Moses, was no more but subordinate to
the authority of his Father. The same is more expressely signified, by
that that hee teacheth us to pray, "Our Father, Let thy Kingdome come;"
and, "For thine is the Kingdome, the power and the Glory;" and by that
it is said, that "Hee shall come in the Glory of his Father;" and by
that which St. Paul saith, (1 Cor. 15.24.) "then commeth the end, when
hee shall have delivered up the Kingdome to God, even the Father;" and
by many other most expresse places.




One And The Same God Is The Person Represented By Moses, And By Christ

Our Saviour therefore, both in Teaching, and Reigning, representeth (as
Moses Did) the Person of God; which God from that time forward, but
not before, is called the Father; and being still one and the same
substance, is one Person as represented by Moses, and another Person as
represented by his Sonne the Christ. For Person being a relative to a
Representer, it is consequent to plurality of Representers, that there
bee a plurality of Persons, though of one and the same Substance.



CHAPTER XLII. OF POWER ECCLESIASTICALL


For the understanding of POWER ECCLESIASTICALL, what, and in whom it is,
we are to distinguish the time from the Ascension of our Saviour, into
two parts; one before the Conversion of Kings, and men endued with
Soveraign Civill Power; the other after their Conversion. For it was
long after the Ascension, before any King, or Civill Soveraign embraced,
and publiquely allowed the teaching of Christian Religion.




Of The Holy Spirit That Fel On The Apostles

And for the time between, it is manifest, that the Power
Ecclesiasticall, was in the Apostles; and after them in such as were by
them ordained to Preach the Gospell, and to convert men to Christianity,
and to direct them that were converted in the way of Salvation; and
after these the Power was delivered again to others by these ordained,
and this was done by Imposition of hands upon such as were ordained; by
which was signified the giving of the Holy Spirit, or Spirit of God, to
those whom they ordained Ministers of God, to advance his Kingdome.
So that Imposition of hands, was nothing else but the Seal of their
Commission to Preach Christ, and teach his Doctrine; and the giving of
the Holy Ghost by that ceremony of Imposition of hands, was an imitation
of that which Moses did. For Moses used the same ceremony to his
Minister Joshua, as wee read Deuteronomy 34. ver. 9. "And Joshua the son
of Nun was full of the Spirit of Wisdome; for Moses had laid his
hands upon him." Our Saviour therefore between his Resurrection, and
Ascension, gave his Spirit to the Apostles; first, by "Breathing on
them, and saying," (John 20.22.) "Receive yee the Holy Spirit;" and after
his Ascension (Acts 2.2, 3.) by sending down upon them, a "mighty wind,
and Cloven tongues of fire;" and not by Imposition of hands; as neither
did God lay his hands on Moses; and his Apostles afterward, transmitted
the same Spirit by Imposition of hands, as Moses did to Joshua. So that
it is manifest hereby, in whom the Power Ecclesiasticall continually
remained, in those first times, where there was not any Christian
Common-wealth; namely, in them that received the same from the Apostles,
by successive laying on of hands.




Of The Trinity

Here wee have the Person of God born now the third time. For as Moses,
and the High Priests, were Gods Representative in the Old Testament;
and our Saviour himselfe as Man, during his abode on earth: So the Holy
Ghost, that is to say, the Apostles, and their successors, in the Office
of Preaching, and Teaching, that had received the Holy Spirit, have
Represented him ever since. But a Person, (as I have shewn before,
[chapt. 16.].) is he that is Represented, as often as hee is
Represented; and therefore God, who has been Represented (that is,
Personated) thrice, may properly enough be said to be three Persons;
though neither the word Person, nor Trinity be ascribed to him in the
Bible. St. John indeed (1 Epist. 5.7.) saith, "There be three that bear
witnesse in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and these
Three are One:" But this disagreeth not, but accordeth fitly with three
Persons in the proper signification of Persons; which is, that which is
Represented by another. For so God the Father, as Represented by Moses,
is one Person; and as Represented by his Sonne, another Person, and as
Represented by the Apostles, and by the Doctors that taught by authority
from them derived, is a third Person; and yet every Person here, is
the Person of one and the same God. But a man may here ask, what it was
whereof these three bare witnesse. St. John therefore tells us (verse
11.) that they bear witnesse, that "God hath given us eternall life
in his Son." Again, if it should be asked, wherein that testimony
appeareth, the Answer is easie; for he hath testified the same by the
miracles he wrought, first by Moses; secondly, by his Son himself; and
lastly by his Apostles, that had received the Holy Spirit; all which
in their times Represented the Person of God; and either prophecyed, or
preached Jesus Christ. And as for the Apostles, it was the character
of the Apostleship, in the twelve first and great Apostles, to bear
Witnesse of his Resurrection; as appeareth expressely (Acts 1. ver.
21,22.) where St Peter, when a new Apostle was to be chosen in the place
of Judas Iscariot, useth these words, "Of these men which have companied
with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst us,
beginning at the Baptisme of John, unto that same day that hee was
taken up from us, must one bee ordained to be a Witnesse with us of his
Resurrection:" which words interpret the Bearing of Witnesse, mentioned
by St. John. There is in the same place mentioned another Trinity of
Witnesses in Earth. For (ver. 8.) he saith, "there are three that bear
Witnesse in Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Bloud; and these
three agree in one:" that is to say, the graces of Gods Spirit, and the
two Sacraments, Baptisme, and the Lords Supper, which all agree in one
Testimony, to assure the consciences of beleevers, of eternall life; of
which Testimony he saith (verse 10.) "He that beleeveth on the Son of
man hath the Witnesse in himselfe." In this Trinity on Earth the Unity
is not of the thing; for the Spirit, the Water, and the Bloud, are not
the same substance, though they give the same testimony: But in the
Trinity of Heaven, the Persons are the persons of one and the same God,
though Represented in three different times and occasions. To conclude,
the doctrine of the Trinity, as far as can be gathered directly from
the Scripture, is in substance this; that God who is alwaies One and the
same, was the Person Represented by Moses; the Person Represented by
his Son Incarnate; and the Person Represented by the Apostles. As
Represented by the Apostles, the Holy Spirit by which they spake, is
God; As Represented by his Son (that was God and Man), the Son is that
God; As represented by Moses, and the High Priests, the Father, that is
to say, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is that God: From whence
we may gather the reason why those names Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in
the signification of the Godhead, are never used in the Old Testament:
For they are Persons, that is, they have their names from Representing;
which could not be, till divers men had Represented Gods Person in
ruling, or in directing under him.

Thus wee see how the Power Ecclesiasticall was left by our Saviour
to the Apostles; and how they were (to the end they might the better
exercise that Power,) endued with the Holy Spirit, which is therefore
called sometime in the New Testament Paracletus which signifieth an
Assister, or one called to for helpe, though it bee commonly translated
a Comforter. Let us now consider the Power it selfe, what it was, and
over whom.




The Power Ecclesiasticall Is But The Power To Teach

Cardinall Bellarmine in his third generall Controversie, hath handled a
great many questions concerning the Ecclesiasticall Power of the Pope
of Rome; and begins with this, Whether it ought to be Monarchicall,
Aristocraticall, or Democraticall. All which sorts of Power, are
Soveraign, and Coercive. If now it should appear, that there is no
Coercive Power left them by our Saviour; but onely a Power to proclaim
the Kingdom of Christ, and to perswade men to submit themselves
thereunto; and by precepts and good counsell, to teach them that have
submitted, what they are to do, that they may be received into the
Kingdom of God when it comes; and that the Apostles, and other Ministers
of the Gospel, are our Schoolemasters, and not our Commanders, and their
Precepts not Laws, but wholesome Counsells then were all that dispute in
vain.




An Argument Thereof, The Power Of Christ Himself

I have shewn already (in the last Chapter,) that the Kingdome of Christ
is not of this world: therefore neither can his Ministers (unlesse they
be Kings,) require obedience in his name. For if the Supreme King, have
not his Regall Power in this world; by what authority can obedience be
required to his Officers? As my Father sent me, (so saith our Saviour)
I send you. But our Saviour was sent to perswade the Jews to return to,
and to invite the Gentiles, to receive the Kingdome of his Father, and
not to reign in Majesty, no not, as his Fathers Lieutenant, till the day
of Judgment.




From The Name Of Regeneration

The time between the Ascension, and the generall Resurrection, is
called, not a Reigning, but a Regeneration; that is, a Preparation
of men for the second and glorious coming of Christ, at the day of
Judgment; as appeareth by the words of our Saviour, Mat. 19.28. "You
that have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit
in the throne of his glory, you shall also sit upon twelve Thrones;" And
of St. Paul (Ephes. 6.15.) "Having your feet shod with the Preparation
of the Gospell of Peace."




From The Comparison Of It, With Fishing, Leaven, Seed

And is compared by our Saviour, to Fishing; that is, to winning men
to obedience, not by Coercion, and Punishing; but by Perswasion: and
therefore he said not to his Apostles, hee would make them so many
Nimrods, Hunters Of Men; But Fishers Of Men. It is compared also to
Leaven; to Sowing of Seed, and to the Multiplication of a grain of
Mustard-seed; by all which Compulsion is excluded; and consequently
there can in that time be no actual Reigning. The work of Christs
Ministers, is Evangelization; that is, a Proclamation of Christ, and
a preparation for his second comming; as the Evangelization of John
Baptist, was a preparation to his first coming.




From The Nature Of Faith:

Again, the Office of Christs Ministers in this world, is to make men
Beleeve, and have Faith in Christ: But Faith hath no relation to, nor
dependence at all upon Compulsion, or Commandement; but onely upon
certainty, or probability of Arguments drawn from Reason, or from
something men beleeve already. Therefore the Ministers of Christ in this
world, have no Power by that title, to Punish any man for not Beleeving,
or for Contradicting what they say; they have I say no Power by that
title of Christs Ministers, to Punish such: but if they have Soveraign
Civill Power, by politick institution, then they may indeed lawfully
Punish any Contradiction to their laws whatsoever: And St. Paul, of
himselfe and other then Preachers of the Gospell saith in expresse
words, (2 Cor. 1.24.) "Wee have no Dominion over your Faith, but are
Helpers of your Joy."




From The Authority Christ Hath Left To Civill Princes

Another Argument, that the Ministers of Christ in this present world
have no right of Commanding, may be drawn from the lawfull Authority
which Christ hath left to all Princes, as well Christians, as Infidels.
St. Paul saith (Col. 3.20.) "Children obey your Parents in all things;
for this is well pleasing to the Lord." And ver. 22. "Servants obey in
all things your Masters according to the flesh, not with eye-service, as
men-pleasers, but in singlenesse of heart, as fearing the Lord;" This is
spoken to them whose Masters were Infidells; and yet they are bidden
to obey them In All Things. And again, concerning obedience to Princes.
(Rom. 13. the first 6. verses) exhorting to "be subject to the Higher
Powers," he saith, "that all Power is ordained of God;" and "that we
ought to be subject to them, not onely for" fear of incurring their
"wrath, but also for conscience sake." And St. Peter, (1 Epist. chap. 2e
ver. 13, 14, 15.) "Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the
Lords sake, whether it bee to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governours,
as to them that be sent by him for the punishment of evill doers, and
for the praise of them that doe well; for so is the will of God."
And again St. Paul (Tit. 3.1.) "Put men in mind to be subject to
Principalities, and Powers, and to obey Magistrates." These Princes, and
Powers, whereof St. Peter, and St. Paul here speak, were all Infidels;
much more therefore we are to obey those Christians, whom God hath
ordained to have Soveraign Power over us. How then can wee be obliged
to doe any thing contrary to the Command of the King, or other Soveraign
Representant of the Common-wealth, whereof we are members, and by whom
we look to be protected? It is therefore manifest, that Christ hath not
left to his Ministers in this world, unlesse they be also endued with
Civill Authority, any authority to Command other men.




What Christians May Do To Avoid Persecution

But what (may some object) if a King, or a Senate, or other Soveraign
Person forbid us to beleeve in Christ? To this I answer, that such
forbidding is of no effect, because Beleef, and Unbeleef never follow
mens Commands. Faith is a gift of God, which Man can neither give, nor
take away by promise of rewards, or menaces of torture. And if it be
further asked, What if wee bee commanded by our lawfull Prince, to say
with our tongue, wee beleeve not; must we obey such command? Profession
with the tongue is but an externall thing, and no more then any other
gesture whereby we signifie our obedience; and wherein a Christian,
holding firmely in his heart the Faith of Christ, hath the same liberty
which the Prophet Elisha allowed to Naaman the Syrian. Naaman was
converted in his heart to the God of Israel; For hee saith (2 Kings
5.17.) "Thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt offering, nor
sacrifice unto other Gods but unto the Lord. In this thing the Lord
pardon thy servant, that when my Master goeth into the house of Rimmon
to worship there, and he leaneth on my hand, and I bow my selfe in the
house of Rimmon; when I bow my selfe in the house of Rimmon, the Lord
pardon thy servant in this thing." This the Prophet approved, and bid
him "Goe in peace." Here Naaman beleeved in his heart; but by bowing
before the Idol Rimmon, he denyed the true God in effect, as much as
if he had done it with his lips. But then what shall we answer to our
Saviours saying, "Whosoever denyeth me before men, I will deny him
before my Father which is in Heaven?" This we may say, that whatsoever
a Subject, as Naaman was, is compelled to in obedience to his Soveraign,
and doth it not in order to his own mind, but in order to the laws of
his country, that action is not his, but his Soveraigns; nor is it he
that in this case denyeth Christ before men, but his Governour, and the
law of his countrey. If any man shall accuse this doctrine, as repugnant
to true, and unfeigned Christianity; I ask him, in case there should be
a subject in any Christian Common-wealth, that should be inwardly in his
heart of the Mahometan Religion, whether if his Soveraign Command him to
bee present at the divine service of the Christian Church, and that on
pain of death, he think that Mamometan obliged in conscience to suffer
death for that cause, rather than to obey that command of his lawful
Prince. If he say, he ought rather to suffer death, then he authorizeth
all private men, to disobey their Princes, in maintenance of their
Religion, true, or false; if he say, he ought to bee obedient, then he
alloweth to himself, that which hee denyeth to another, contrary to the
words of our Saviour, "Whatsoever you would that men should doe unto
you, that doe yee unto them;" and contrary to the Law of Nature, (which
is the indubitable everlasting Law of God) "Do not to another, that
which thou wouldest not he should doe unto thee."




Of Martyrs

But what then shall we say of all those Martyrs we read of in the
History of the Church, that they have needlessely cast away their lives?
For answer hereunto, we are to distinguish the persons that have been
for that cause put to death; whereof some have received a Calling to
preach, and professe the Kingdome of Christ openly; others have had no
such Calling, nor more has been required of them than their owne faith.
The former sort, if they have been put to death, for bearing witnesse to
this point, that Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, were true Martyrs;
For a Martyr is, (to give the true definition of the word) a Witnesse of
the Resurrection of Jesus the Messiah; which none can be but those
that conversed with him on earth, and saw him after he was risen: For a
Witnesse must have seen what he testifieth, or else his testimony is not
good. And that none but such, can properly be called Martyrs of Christ,
is manifest out of the words of St. Peter, Act. 1.21, 22. "Wherefore of
these men which have companyed with us all the time that the Lord Jesus
went in and out amongst us, beginning from the Baptisme of John unto
that same day hee was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a
Martyr (that is a Witnesse) with us of his Resurrection:" Where we
may observe, that he which is to bee a Witnesse of the truth of
the Resurrection of Christ, that is to say, of the truth of this
fundamentall article of Christian Religion, that Jesus was the Christ,
must be some Disciple that conversed with him, and saw him before, and
after his Resurrection; and consequently must be one of his originall
Disciples: whereas they which were not so, can Witnesse no more, but
that their antecessors said it, and are therefore but Witnesses of
other mens testimony; and are but second Martyrs, or Martyrs of Christs
Witnesses.

He, that to maintain every doctrine which he himself draweth out of
the History of our Saviours life, and of the Acts, or Epistles of the
Apostles; or which he beleeveth upon the authority of a private man,
wil oppose the Laws and Authority of the Civill State, is very far from
being a Martyr of Christ, or a Martyr of his Martyrs. ’Tis one Article
onely, which to die for, meriteth so honorable a name; and that Article
is this, that Jesus Is The Christ; that is to say, He that hath redeemed
us, and shall come again to give us salvation, and eternall life in his
glorious Kingdome. To die for every tenet that serveth the ambition,
or profit of the Clergy, is not required; nor is it the Death of the
Witnesse, but the Testimony it self that makes the Martyr: for the word
signifieth nothing else, but the man that beareth Witnesse, whether he
be put to death for his testimony, or not.

Also he that is not sent to preach this fundamentall article, but taketh
it upon him of his private authority, though he be a Witnesse, and
consequently a Martyr, either primary of Christ, or secondary of his
Apostles, Disciples, or their Successors; yet is he not obliged to
suffer death for that cause; because being not called thereto, tis
not required at his hands; nor ought hee to complain, if he loseth
the reward he expecteth from those that never set him on work. None
therefore can be a Martyr, neither of the first, nor second degree, that
have not a warrant to preach Christ come in the flesh; that is to say,
none, but such as are sent to the conversion of Infidels. For no man
is a Witnesse to him that already beleeveth, and therefore needs no
Witnesse; but to them that deny, or doubt, or have not heard it. Christ
sent his Apostles, and his Seventy Disciples, with authority to preach;
he sent not all that beleeved: And he sent them to unbeleevers; "I send
you (saith he) as sheep amongst wolves;" not as sheep to other sheep.




Argument From The Points Of Their Commission

Lastly the points of their Commission, as they are expressely set down
in the Gospel, contain none of them any authority over the Congregation.




To Preach

We have first (Mat. 10.) that the twelve Apostles were sent "to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel," and commanded to Preach, "that the
Kingdome of God was at hand." Now Preaching in the originall, is that
act, which a Crier, Herald, or other Officer useth to doe publiquely in
Proclaiming of a King. But a Crier hath not right to Command any man.
And (Luke 10.2.) the seventy Disciples are sent out, "as Labourers,
not as Lords of the Harvest;" and are bidden (verse 9.) to say, "The
Kingdome of God is come nigh unto you;" and by Kingdome here is meant,
not the Kingdome of Grace, but the Kingdome of Glory; for they are
bidden to denounce it (ver. 11.) to those Cities which shall not receive
them, as a threatning, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for
Sodome, than for such a City. And (Mat. 20.28.) our Saviour telleth his
Disciples, that sought Priority of place, their Office was to minister,
even as the Son of man came, not to be ministred unto, but to minister.
Preachers therefore have not Magisteriall, but Ministeriall power: "Bee
not called Masters, (saith our Saviour, Mat. 23.10) for one is your
Master, even Christ."




And Teach

Another point of their Commission, is, to Teach All Nations; as it is in
Mat. 28.19. or as in St. Mark 16.15 "Goe into all the world, and Preach
the Gospel to every creature." Teaching therefore, and Preaching is the
same thing. For they that Proclaim the comming of a King, must withall
make known by what right he commeth, if they mean men shall submit
themselves unto him: As St. Paul did to the Jews of Thessalonica,
when "three Sabbath days he reasoned with them out of the Scriptures,
opening, and alledging that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen
again from the dead, and that this Jesus is Christ." But to teach out
of the Old Testament that Jesus was Christ, (that is to say, King,)
and risen from the dead, is not to say, that men are bound after they
beleeve it, to obey those that tell them so, against the laws, and
commands of their Soveraigns; but that they shall doe wisely, to expect
the coming of Christ hereafter, in Patience, and Faith, with Obedience
to their present Magistrates.




To Baptize;

Another point of their Commission, is to Baptize, "in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." What is Baptisme?
Dipping into water. But what is it to Dip a man into the water in the
name of any thing? The meaning of these words of Baptisme is this. He
that is Baptized, is Dipped or Washed, as a sign of becomming a new man,
and a loyall subject to that God, whose Person was represented in old
time by Moses, and the High Priests, when he reigned over the Jews; and
to Jesus Christ, his Sonne, God, and Man, that hath redeemed us, and
shall in his humane nature Represent his Fathers Person in his eternall
Kingdome after the Resurrection; and to acknowledge the Doctrine of the
Apostles, who assisted by the Spirit of the Father, and of the Son, were
left for guides to bring us into that Kingdome, to be the onely, and
assured way thereunto. This, being our promise in Baptisme; and the
Authority of Earthly Soveraigns being not to be put down till the day of
Judgment; (for that is expressely affirmed by S. Paul 1 Cor. 15. 22, 23,
24. where he saith, "As in Adam all die, so in Christ all shall be
made alive. But every man in his owne order, Christ the first fruits,
afterward they that are Christs, at his comming; Then Commeth the end,
when he shall have delivered up the Kingdome of God, even the Father,
when he shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power")
it is manifest, that we do not in Baptisme constitute over us another
authority, by which our externall actions are to be governed in this
life; but promise to take the doctrine of the Apostles for our direction
in the way to life eternall.




And To Forgive, And Retain Sinnes

The Power of Remission, And Retention Of Sinnes, called also the Power
of Loosing, and Binding, and sometimes the Keyes Of The Kingdome Of
Heaven, is a consequence of the Authority to Baptize, or refuse to
Baptize. For Baptisme is the Sacrament of Allegeance, of them that are
to be received into the Kingdome of God; that is to say, into Eternall
life; that is to say, to Remission of Sin: For as Eternall life was lost
by the Committing, so it is recovered by the Remitting of mens Sins. The
end of Baptisme is Remission of Sins: and therefore St. Peter, when they
that were converted by his Sermon on the day of Pentecost, asked what
they were to doe, advised them to "repent, and be Baptized in the name
of Jesus, for the Remission of Sins." And therefore seeing to Baptize
is to declare the Reception of men into Gods Kingdome; and to refuse to
Baptize is to declare their Exclusion; it followeth, that the Power
to declare them Cast out, or Retained in it, was given to the same
Apostles, and their Substitutes, and Successors. And therefore after our
Saviour had breathed upon them, saying, (John 20.22.) "Receive the Holy
Ghost," hee addeth in the next verse, "Whose soever Sins ye Remit,
they are Remitted unto them; and whose soever Sins ye Retain, they are
Retained." By which words, is not granted an Authority to Forgive, or
Retain Sins, simply and absolutely, as God Forgiveth or Retaineth them,
who knoweth the Heart of man, and truth of his Penitence and Conversion;
but conditionally, to the Penitent: And this Forgivenesse, or
Absolution, in case the absolved have but a feigned Repentance, is
thereby without other act, or sentence of the Absolvent, made void,
and hath no effect at all to Salvation, but on the contrary, to the
Aggravation of his Sin. Therefore the Apostles, and their Successors,
are to follow but the outward marks of Repentance; which appearing, they
have no Authority to deny Absolution; and if they appeare not, they have
no authority to Absolve. The same also is to be observed in Baptisme:
for to a converted Jew, or Gentile, the Apostles had not the Power to
deny Baptisme; nor to grant it to the Un-penitent. But seeing no man is
able to discern the truth of another mans Repentance, further than by
externall marks, taken from his words, and actions, which are subject to
hypocrisie; another question will arise, Who it is that is constituted
Judge of those marks. And this question is decided by our Saviour
himself; (Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.) "If thy Brother (saith he) shall
trespasse against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee, and him
alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy Brother. But if he
will not hear thee, then take with thee one, or two more. And if he
shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church, let him be unto
thee as an Heathen man, and a Publican." By which it is manifest, that
the Judgment concerning the truth of Repentance, belonged not to any one
Man, but to the Church, that is, to the Assembly of the Faithfull, or
to them that have authority to bee their Representant. But besides the
Judgment, there is necessary also the pronouncing of Sentence: And
this belonged alwaies to the Apostle, or some Pastor of the Church,
as Prolocutor; and of this our Saviour speaketh in the 18 verse,
"Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven." And
comformable hereunto was the practise of St. Paul (1 Cor. 5.3, 4, & 5.)
where he saith, "For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit,
have determined already, as though I were present, concerning him that
hath so done this deed; In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ when ye
are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, To deliver such a one to Satan;" that is to say, to cast him
out of the Church, as a man whose Sins are not Forgiven. Paul here
pronounceth the Sentence; but the Assembly was first to hear the Cause,
(for St. Paul was absent;) and by consequence to condemn him. But in
the same chapter (ver. 11, 12.) the Judgment in such a case is more
expressely attributed to the Assembly: "But now I have written unto
you, not to keep company, if any man that is called a Brother be a
Fornicator, &c. with such a one no not to eat. For what have I to do to
judg them that are without? Do not ye judg them that are within?"
The Sentence therefore by which a man was put out of the Church, was
pronounced by the Apostle, or Pastor; but the Judgment concerning the
merit of the cause, was in the Church; that is to say, (as the times
were before the conversion of Kings, and men that had Soveraign
Authority in the Common-wealth,) the Assembly of the Christians dwelling
in the same City; as in Corinth, in the Assembly of the Christians of
Corinth.




Of Excommunication

This part of the Power of the Keyes, by which men were thrust out from
the Kingdome of God, is that which is called Excommunication; and to
excommunicate, is in the Originall, Aposunagogon Poiein, To Cast Out Of
The Synagogue; that is, out of the place of Divine service; a word drawn
from the custom of the Jews, to cast out of their Synagogues, such as
they thought in manners, or doctrine, contagious, as Lepers were by the
Law of Moses separated from the congregation of Israel, till such time
as they should be by the Priest pronounced clean.




The Use Of Excommunication Without Civill Power.

The Use and Effect of Excommunication, whilest it was not yet
strengthened with the Civill Power, was no more, than that they, who
were not Excommunicate, were to avoid the company of them that were.
It was not enough to repute them as Heathen, that never had been
Christians; for with such they might eate, and drink; which with
Excommunicate persons they might not do; as appeareth by the words of
St. Paul, (1 Cor. 5. ver. 9, 10, &c.) where he telleth them, he had
formerly forbidden them to "company with Fornicators;" but (because that
could not bee without going out of the world,) he restraineth it to such
Fornicators, and otherwise vicious persons, as were of the brethren;
"with such a one" (he saith) they ought not to keep company, "no, not to
eat." And this is no more than our Saviour saith (Mat. 18.17.) "Let
him be to thee as a Heathen, and as a Publican." For Publicans (which
signifieth Farmers, and Receivers of the revenue of the Common-wealth)
were so hated, and detested by the Jews that were to pay for it, as
that Publican and Sinner were taken amongst them for the same thing:
Insomuch, as when our Saviour accepted the invitation of Zacchaeus a
Publican; though it were to Convert him, yet it was objected to him as
a Crime. And therefore, when our Saviour, to Heathen, added Publican, he
did forbid them to eat with a man Excommunicate.

As for keeping them out of their Synagogues, or places of Assembly, they
had no Power to do it, but that of the owner of the place, whether he
were Christian, or Heathen. And because all places are by right, in the
Dominion of the Common-wealth; as well hee that was Excommunicated, as
hee that never was Baptized, might enter into them by Commission from
the Civill Magistrate; as Paul before his conversion entred into their
Synagogues at Damascus, (Acts 9.2.) to apprehend Christians, men and
women, and to carry them bound to Jerusalem, by Commission from the High
Priest.




Of No Effect Upon An Apostate

By which it appears, that upon a Christian, that should become an
Apostate, in a place where the Civill Power did persecute, or not assist
the Church, the effect of Excommunication had nothing in it, neither of
dammage in this world, nor of terrour: Not of terrour, because of their
unbeleef; nor of dammage, because they returned thereby into the favour
of the world; and in the world to come, were to be in no worse estate,
then they which never had beleeved. The dammage redounded rather to the
Church, by provocation of them they cast out, to a freer execution of
their malice.




But Upon The Faithfull Only

Excommunication therefore had its effect onely upon those, that beleeved
that Jesus Christ was to come again in Glory, to reign over, and to
judge both the quick, and the dead, and should therefore refuse entrance
into his Kingdom, to those whose Sins were Retained; that is, to those
that were Excommunicated by the Church. And thence it is that St. Paul
calleth Excommunication, a delivery of the Excommunicate person to
Satan. For without the Kingdom of Christ, all other Kingdomes after
Judgment, are comprehended in the Kingdome of Satan. This is it that the
faithfull stood in fear of, as long as they stood Excommunicate, that is
to say, in an estate wherein their sins were not Forgiven. Whereby wee
may understand, that Excommunication in the time that Christian Religion
was not authorized by the Civill Power, was used onely for a correction
of manners, not of errours in opinion: for it is a punishment, whereof
none could be sensible but such as beleeved, and expected the coming
again of our Saviour to judge the world; and they who so beleeved,
needed no other opinion, but onely uprightnesse of life, to be saved.




For What Fault Lyeth Excommunication

There Lyeth Excommunication for Injustice; as (Mat. 18.) If thy Brother
offend thee, tell it him privately; then with Witnesses; lastly, tell
the Church; and then if he obey not, "Let him be to thee as an Heathen
man, and a Publican." And there lyeth Excommunication for a Scandalous
Life, as (1 Cor. 5. 11.) "If any man that is called a Brother, be
a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Drunkard, or an
Extortioner, with such a one yee are not to eat." But to Excommunicate a
man that held this foundation, that Jesus Was The Christ, for difference
of opinion in other points, by which that Foundation was not destroyed,
there appeareth no authority in the Scripture, nor example in the
Apostles. There is indeed in St. Paul (Titus 3.10.) a text that seemeth
to be to the contrary. "A man that is an Haeretique, after the first
and second admonition, reject." For an Haeretique, is he, that being a
member of the Church, teacheth neverthelesse some private opinion, which
the Church has forbidden: and such a one, S. Paul adviseth Titus, after
the first, and second admonition, to Reject. But to Reject (in this
place) is not to Excommunicate the Man; But to Give Over Admonishing
Him, To Let Him Alone, To Set By Disputing With Him, as one that is to
be convinced onely by himselfe. The same Apostle saith (2 Tim. 2.23.)
"Foolish and unlearned questions avoid;" The word Avoid in this place,
and Reject in the former, is the same in the Originall, paraitou: but
Foolish questions may bee set by without Excommunication. And again,
(Tit. 3.93) "Avoid Foolish questions," where the Originall, periistaso,
(set them by) is equivalent to the former word Reject. There is no
other place that can so much as colourably be drawn, to countenance
the Casting out of the Church faithfull men, such as beleeved the
foundation, onely for a singular superstructure of their own, proceeding
perhaps from a good & pious conscience. But on the contrary, all such
places as command avoiding such disputes, are written for a Lesson to
Pastors, (such as Timothy and Titus were) not to make new Articles of
Faith, by determining every small controversie, which oblige men to a
needlesse burthen of Conscience, or provoke them to break the union of
the Church. Which Lesson the Apostles themselves observed well. S. Peter
and S. Paul, though their controversie were great, (as we may read
in Gal. 2.11.) yet they did not cast one another out of the Church.
Neverthelesse, during the Apostles time, there were other Pastors that
observed it not; As Diotrephes (3 John 9. &c.) who cast out of the
Church, such as S. John himself thought fit to be received into it, out
of a pride he took in Praeeminence; so early it was, that Vainglory, and
Ambition had found entrance into the Church of Christ.




Of Persons Liable To Excommunication

That a man be liable to Excommunication, there be many conditions
requisite; as First, that he be a member of some Commonalty, that is to
say, of some lawfull Assembly, that is to say, of some Christian
Church, that hath power to judge of the cause for which hee is to
bee Excommunicated. For where there is no community, there can bee no
Excommunication; nor where there is no power to Judge, can there bee any
power to give Sentence. From hence it followeth, that one Church cannot
be Excommunicated by another: For either they have equall power
to Excommunicate each other, in which case Excommunication is not
Discipline, nor an act of Authority, but Schisme, and Dissolution of
charity; or one is so subordinate to the other, as that they both
have but one voice, and then they be but one Church; and the part
Excommunicated, is no more a Church, but a dissolute number of
individuall persons.

And because the sentence of Excommunication, importeth an advice, not to
keep company, nor so much as to eat with him that is Excommunicate, if
a Soveraign Prince, or Assembly bee Excommunicate, the sentence is of no
effect. For all Subjects are bound to be in the company and presence of
their own Soveraign (when he requireth it) by the law of Nature; nor
can they lawfully either expell him from any place of his own Dominion,
whether profane or holy; nor go out of his Dominion, without his leave;
much lesse (if he call them to that honour,) refuse to eat with him. And
as to other Princes and States, because they are not parts of one and
the same congregation, they need not any other sentence to keep
them from keeping company with the State Excommunicate: for the
very Institution, as it uniteth many men into one Community; so it
dissociateth one Community from another: so that Excommunication is
not needfull for keeping Kings and States asunder; nor has any further
effect then is in the nature of Policy it selfe; unlesse it be to
instigate Princes to warre upon one another.

Nor is the Excommunication of a Christian Subject, that obeyeth the laws
of his own Soveraign, whether Christian, or Heathen, of any effect. For
if he beleeve that "Jesus is the Christ, he hath the Spirit of God" (1
Joh. 4.1.) "and God dwelleth in him, and he in God," (1 Joh. 4.15.) But
hee that hath the Spirit of God; hee that dwelleth in God; hee in
whom God dwelleth, can receive no harm by the Excommunication of men.
Therefore, he that beleeveth Jesus to be the Christ, is free from all
the dangers threatned to persons Excommunicate. He that beleeveth it
not, is no Christian. Therefore a true and unfeigned Christian is not
liable to Excommunication; Nor he also that is a professed Christian,
till his Hypocrisy appear in his Manners, that is, till his behaviour
bee contrary to the law of his Soveraign, which is the rule of Manners,
and which Christ and his Apostles have commanded us to be subject to.
For the Church cannot judge of Manners but by externall Actions, which
Actions can never bee unlawfull, but when they are against the Law of
the Common-wealth.

If a mans Father, or Mother, or Master bee Excommunicate, yet are not
the Children forbidden to keep them Company, nor to Eat with them; for
that were (for the most part) to oblige them not to eat at all, for want
of means to get food; and to authorise them to disobey their Parents,
and Masters, contrary to the Precept of the Apostles.

In summe, the Power of Excommunication cannot be extended further than
to the end for which the Apostles and Pastors of the Church have
their Commission from our Saviour; which is not to rule by Command and
Coaction, but by Teaching and Direction of men in the way of Salvation
in the world to come. And as a Master in any Science, may abandon his
Scholar, when hee obstinately neglecteth the practise of his rules; but
not accuse him of Injustice, because he was never bound to obey him:
so a Teacher of Christian doctrine may abandon his Disciples that
obstinately continue in an unchristian life; but he cannot say, they doe
him wrong, because they are not obliged to obey him: For to a Teacher
that shall so complain, may be applyed the Answer of God to Samuel in
the like place, (1 Sam. 8.) "They have not rejected thee, but mee."
Excommunication therefore when it wanteth the assistance of the Civill
Power, as it doth, when a Christian State, or Prince is Excommunicate
by a forain Authority, is without effect; and consequently ought to
be without terrour. The name of Fulmen Excommunicationis (that is, the
Thunderbolt Of Excommunication) proceeded from an imagination of the
Bishop of Rome, which first used it, that he was King of Kings, as the
Heathen made Jupiter King of the Gods; and assigned him in their Poems,
and Pictures, a Thunderbolt, wherewith to subdue, and punish the Giants,
that should dare to deny his power: Which imagination was grounded on
two errours; one, that the Kingdome of Christ is of this world, contrary
to our Saviours owne words, "My Kingdome is not of this world;" the
other, that hee is Christs Vicar, not onely over his owne Subjects,
but over all the Christians of the World; whereof there is no ground in
Scripture, and the contrary shall bee proved in its due place.




Of The Interpreter Of The Scriptures Before Civill Soveraigns Became
Christians

St. Paul coming to Thessalonica, where was a Synagogue of the Jews,
(Acts 17.2, 3.) "As his manner was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath
dayes reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, Opening and alledging,
that Christ must needs have suffered and risen again from the dead; and
that this Jesus whom he preached was the Christ." The Scriptures here
mentioned were the Scriptures of the Jews, that is, the Old Testament.
The men, to whom he was to prove that Jesus was the Christ, and risen
again from the dead, were also Jews, and did beleeve already, that
they were the Word of God. Hereupon (as it is verse 4.) some of them
beleeved, and (as it is in the 5. ver.) some beleeved not. What was
the reason, when they all beleeved the Scripture, that they did not
all beleeve alike; but that some approved, others disapproved the
Interpretation of St. Paul that cited them; and every one Interpreted
them to himself? It was this; S. Paul came to them without any Legall
Commission, and in the manner of one that would not Command, but
Perswade; which he must needs do, either by Miracles, as Moses did
to the Israelites in Egypt, that they might see his Authority in Gods
works; or by Reasoning from the already received Scripture, that
they might see the truth of his doctrine in Gods Word. But whosoever
perswadeth by reasoning from principles written, maketh him to whom hee
speaketh Judge, both of the meaning of those principles, and also of the
force of his inferences upon them. If these Jews of Thessalonica were
not, who else was the Judge of what S. Paul alledged out of Scripture?
If S. Paul, what needed he to quote any places to prove his doctrine? It
had been enough to have said, I find it so in Scripture, that is to
say, in your Laws, of which I am Interpreter, as sent by Christ. The
Interpreter therefore of the Scripture, to whose Interpretation the
Jews of Thessalonica were bound to stand, could be none: every one might
beleeve, or not beleeve, according as the Allegations seemed to himselfe
to be agreeable, or not agreeable to the meaning of the places alledged.
And generally in all cases of the world, hee that pretendeth any proofe,
maketh Judge of his proofe him to whom he addresseth his speech. And as
to the case of the Jews in particular, they were bound by expresse words
(Deut. 17.) to receive the determination of all hard questions, from
the Priests and Judges of Israel for the time being. But this is to bee
understood of the Jews that were yet unconverted.

For the Conversion of the Gentiles, there was no use of alledging the
Scriptures, which they beleeved not. The Apostles therefore laboured by
Reason to confute their Idolatry; and that done, to perswade them to the
faith of Christ, by their testimony of his Life, and Resurrection. So
that there could not yet bee any controversie concerning the authority
to Interpret Scripture; seeing no man was obliged during his infidelity,
to follow any mans Interpretation of any Scripture, except his
Soveraigns Interpretation of the Laws of his countrey.

Let us now consider the Conversion it self, and see what there was
therein, that could be cause of such an obligation. Men were converted
to no other thing then to the Beleef of that which the Apostles
preached: And the Apostles preached nothing, but that Jesus was the
Christ, that is to say, the King that was to save them, and reign over
them eternally in the world to come; and consequently that hee was not
dead, but risen again from the dead, and gone up into Heaven, and should
come again one day to judg the world, (which also should rise again to
be judged,) and reward every man according to his works. None of them
preached that himselfe, or any other Apostle was such an Interpreter
of the Scripture, as all that became Christians, ought to take their
Interpretation for Law. For to Interpret the Laws, is part of the
Administration of a present Kingdome; which the Apostles had not. They
prayed then, and all other Pastors ever since, "Let thy Kingdome come;"
and exhorted their Converts to obey their then Ethnique Princes. The New
Testament was not yet published in one Body. Every of the Evangelists
was Interpreter of his own Gospel; and every Apostle of his own Epistle;
And of the Old Testament, our Saviour himselfe saith to the Jews (John
5. 39.) "Search the Scriptures; for in them yee thinke to have eternall
life, and they are they that testifie of me." If hee had not meant they
should Interpret them, hee would not have bidden them take thence the
proof of his being the Christ; he would either have Interpreted them
himselfe, or referred them to the Interpretation of the Priests.

When a difficulty arose, the Apostles and Elders of the Church assembled
themselves together, and determined what should bee preached, and
taught, and how they should Interpret the Scriptures to the People;
but took not from the People the liberty to read, and Interpret them to
themselves. The Apostles sent divers Letters to the Churches, and other
Writings for their instruction; which had been in vain, if they had not
allowed them to Interpret, that is, to consider the meaning of them.
And as it was in the Apostles time, it must be till such time as
there should be Pastors, that could authorise an Interpreter, whose
Interpretation should generally be stood to: But that could not be till
Kings were Pastors, or Pastors Kings.




Of The Power To Make Scripture Law

There be two senses, wherein a Writing may be said to be Canonicall;
for Canon, signifieth a Rule; and a Rule is a Precept, by which a man
is guided, and directed in any action whatsoever. Such Precepts, though
given by a Teacher to his Disciple, or a Counsellor to his friend,
without power to Compell him to observe them, are neverthelesse Canons;
because they are Rules: But when they are given by one, whom he that
receiveth them is bound to obey, then are those Canons, not onely Rules,
but Laws: The question therefore here, is of the Power to make the
Scriptures (which are the Rules of Christian Faith) Laws.




Of The Ten Commandements

That part of the Scripture, which was first Law, was the Ten
Commandements, written in two Tables of Stone, and delivered by God
himselfe to Moses; and by Moses made known to the people. Before that
time there was no written Law of God, who as yet having not chosen any
people to bee his peculiar Kingdome, had given no Law to men, but the
Law of Nature, that is to say, the Precepts of Naturall Reason, written
in every mans own heart. Of these two Tables, the first containeth the
law of Soveraignty; 1. That they should not obey, nor honour the Gods of
other Nations, in these words, "Non habebis Deos alienos coram me," that
is, "Thou shalt not have for Gods, the Gods that other Nations worship;
but onely me:" whereby they were forbidden to obey, or honor, as their
King and Governour, any other God, than him that spake unto them then by
Moses, and afterwards by the High Priest. 2. That they "should not make
any Image to represent him;" that is to say, they were not to choose to
themselves, neither in heaven, nor in earth, any Representative of their
own fancying, but obey Moses and Aaron, whom he had appointed to that
office. 3. That "they should not take the Name of God in vain;" that is,
they should not speak rashly of their King, nor dispute his Right,
nor the commissions of Moses and Aaron, his Lieutenants. 4. That "they
should every Seventh day abstain from their ordinary labour," and employ
that time in doing him Publique Honor. The second Table containeth the
Duty of one man towards another, as "To honor Parents; Not to kill;
Not to Commit Adultery; Not to steale; Not to corrupt Judgment by false
witnesse;" and finally, "Not so much as to designe in their heart the
doing of any injury one to another." The question now is, Who it was
that gave to these written Tables the obligatory force of Lawes. There
is no doubt but that they were made Laws by God himselfe: But because a
Law obliges not, nor is Law to any, but to them that acknowledge it to
be the act of the Soveraign, how could the people of Israel that were
forbidden to approach the Mountain to hear what God said to Moses, be
obliged to obedience to all those laws which Moses propounded to them?
Some of them were indeed the Laws of Nature, as all the Second Table;
and therefore to be acknowledged for Gods Laws; not to the Israelites
alone, but to all people: But of those that were peculiar to the
Israelites, as those of the first Table, the question remains; saving
that they had obliged themselves, presently after the propounding of
them, to obey Moses, in these words (Exod. 20.19.) "Speak them thou to
us, and we will hear thee; but let not God speak to us, lest we die." It
was therefore onely Moses then, and after him the High Priest, whom (by
Moses) God declared should administer this his peculiar Kingdome, that
had on Earth, the power to make this short Scripture of the Decalogue
to bee Law in the Common-wealth of Israel. But Moses, and Aaron, and the
succeeding High Priests were the Civill Soveraigns. Therefore hitherto,
the Canonizing, or making of the Scripture Law, belonged to the Civill
Soveraigne.




Of The Judicial, And Leviticall Law

The Judiciall Law, that is to say, the Laws that God prescribed to the
Magistrates of Israel, for the rule of their administration of Justice,
and of the Sentences, or Judgments they should pronounce, in Pleas
between man and man; and the Leviticall Law, that is to say, the rule
that God prescribed touching the Rites and Ceremonies of the Priests and
Levites, were all delivered to them by Moses onely; and therefore also
became Lawes, by vertue of the same promise of obedience to Moses.
Whether these laws were then written, or not written, but dictated to
the People by Moses (after his forty dayes being with God in the Mount)
by word of mouth, is not expressed in the Text; but they were all
positive Laws, and equivalent to holy Scripture, and made Canonicall by
Moses the Civill Soveraign.




The Second Law

After the Israelites were come into the Plains of Moab over against
Jericho, and ready to enter into the land of Promise, Moses to the
former Laws added divers others; which therefore are called Deuteronomy:
that is, Second Laws. And are (as it is written, Deut. 29.1.) "The words
of a Covenant which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the Children
of Israel, besides the Covenant which he made with them in Horeb." For
having explained those former Laws, in the beginning of the Book of
Deuteronomy, he addeth others, that begin at the 12. Cha. and continue
to the end of the 26. of the same Book. This Law (Deut. 27.1.) they were
commanded to write upon great stones playstered over, at their passing
over Jordan: This Law also was written by Moses himself in a Book; and
delivered into the hands of the "Priests, and to the Elders of Israel,"
(Deut. 31.9.) and commanded (ve. 26.) "to be put in the side of the
Arke;" for in the Ark it selfe was nothing but the Ten Commandements.
This was the Law, which Moses (Deuteronomy 17.18.) commanded the Kings
of Israel should keep a copie of: And this is the Law, which having been
long time lost, was found again in the Temple in the time of Josiah,
and by his authority received for the Law of God. But both Moses at the
writing, and Josiah at the recovery thereof, had both of them the
Civill Soveraignty. Hitherto therefore the Power of making Scripture
Canonicall, was in the Civill Soveraign.

Besides this Book of the Law, there was no other Book, from the time of
Moses, till after the Captivity, received amongst the Jews for the
Law of God. For the Prophets (except a few) lived in the time of the
Captivity it selfe; and the rest lived but a little before it; and were
so far from having their Prophecies generally received for Laws, as that
their persons were persecuted, partly by false Prophets, and partly by
the Kings which were seduced by them. And this Book it self, which was
confirmed by Josiah for the Law of God, and with it all the History of
the Works of God, was lost in the Captivity, and sack of the City of
Jerusalem, as appears by that of 2 Esdras 14.21. "Thy Law is burnt;
therefor no man knoweth the things that are done of thee, of the works
that shall begin." And before the Captivity, between the time when the
Law was lost, (which is not mentioned in the Scripture, but may probably
be thought to be the time of Rehoboam, when Shishak King of Egypt took
the spoils of the Temple,(1 Kings 14.26.)) and the time of Josiah,
when it was found againe, they had no written Word of God, but ruled
according to their own discretion, or by the direction of such, as each
of them esteemed Prophets.




The Old Testament, When Made Canonicall

From whence we may inferre, that the Scriptures of the Old Testament,
which we have at this day, were not Canonicall, nor a Law unto the Jews,
till the renovation of their Covenant with God at their return from the
Captivity, and restauration of their Common-wealth under Esdras. But
from that time forward they were accounted the Law of the Jews, and for
such translated into Greek by Seventy Elders of Judaea, and put into the
Library of Ptolemy at Alexandria, and approved for the Word of God. Now
seeing Esdras was the High Priest, and the High Priest was their Civill
Soveraigne, it is manifest, that the Scriptures were never made Laws,
but by the Soveraign Civill Power.

The New Testament Began To Be Canonicall Under Christian Soveraigns By
the Writings of the Fathers that lived in the time before that Christian
Religion was received, and authorised by Constantine the Emperour, we
may find, that the Books wee now have of the New Testament, were held by
the Christians of that time (except a few, in respect of whose paucity
the rest were called the Catholique Church, and others Haeretiques) for
the dictates of the Holy Ghost; and consequently for the Canon, or Rule
of Faith: such was the reverence and opinion they had of their Teachers;
as generally the reverence that the Disciples bear to their first
Masters, in all manner of doctrine they receive from them, is not small.
Therefore there is no doubt, but when S. Paul wrote to the Churches he
had converted; or any other Apostle, or Disciple of Christ, to those
which had then embraced Christ, they received those their Writings for
the true Christian Doctrine. But in that time, when not the Power and
Authority of the Teacher, but the Faith of the Hearer caused them
to receive it, it was not the Apostles that made their own Writings
Canonicall, but every Convert made them so to himself.

But the question here, is not what any Christian made a Law, or Canon
to himself, (which he might again reject, by the same right he received
it;) but what was so made a Canon to them, as without injustice they
could not doe any thing contrary thereunto. That the New Testament
should in this sense be Canonicall, that is to say, a Law in any place
where the Law of the Common-wealth had not made it so, is contrary to
the nature of a Law. For a Law, (as hath been already shewn) is the
Commandement of that Man, or Assembly, to whom we have given Soveraign
Authority, to make such Rules for the direction of our actions, as hee
shall think fit; and to punish us, when we doe any thing contrary to the
same. When therefore any other man shall offer unto us any other Rules,
which the Soveraign Ruler hath not prescribed, they are but Counsell,
and Advice; which, whether good, or bad, hee that is counselled, may
without injustice refuse to observe, and when contrary to the Laws
already established, without injustice cannot observe, how good soever
he conceiveth it to be. I say, he cannot in this case observe the same
in his actions, nor in his discourse with other men; though he may
without blame beleeve the his private Teachers, and wish he had the
liberty to practise their advice; and that it were publiquely received
for Law. For internall faith is in its own nature invisible, and
consequently exempted from all humane jurisdiction; whereas the words,
and actions that proceed from it, as breaches of our Civil obedience,
are injustice both before God and Man. Seeing then our Saviour hath
denyed his Kingdome to be in this world, seeing he hath said, he came
not to judge, but to save the world, he hath not subjected us to other
Laws than those of the Common-wealth; that is, the Jews to the Law
of Moses, (which he saith (Mat. 5.) he came not to destroy, but to
fulfill,) and other Nations to the Laws of their severall Soveraigns,
and all men to the Laws of Nature; the observing whereof, both he
himselfe, and his Apostles have in their teaching recommended to us, as
a necessary condition of being admitted by him in the last day into his
eternall Kingdome, wherein shall be Protection, and Life everlasting.
Seeing then our Saviour, and his Apostles, left not new Laws to oblige
us in this world, but new Doctrine to prepare us for the next; the Books
of the New Testament, which containe that Doctrine, untill obedience to
them was commanded, by them that God hath given power to on earth to be
Legislators, were not obligatory Canons, that is, Laws, but onely good,
and safe advice, for the direction of sinners in the way to salvation,
which every man might take, and refuse at his owne perill, without
injustice.

Again, our Saviour Christs Commission to his Apostles, and Disciples,
was to Proclaim his Kingdome (not present, but) to come; and to Teach
all Nations; and to Baptize them that should beleeve; and to enter into
the houses of them that should receive them; and where they were not
received, to shake off the dust of their feet against them; but not
to call for fire from heaven to destroy them, nor to compell them to
obedience by the Sword. In all which there is nothing of Power, but of
Perswasion. He sent them out as Sheep unto Wolves, not as Kings to their
Subjects. They had not in Commission to make Laws; but to obey, and
teach obedience to Laws made; and consequently they could not make their
Writings obligatory Canons, without the help of the Soveraign Civill
Power. And therefore the Scripture of the New Testament is there only
Law, where the lawfull Civill Power hath made it so. And there also the
King, or Soveraign, maketh it a Law to himself; by which he subjecteth
himselfe, not to the Doctor, or Apostle, that converted him, but to God
himself, and his Son Jesus Christ, as immediately as did the Apostles
themselves.




Of The Power Of Councells To Make The Scripture Law

That which may seem to give the New Testament, in respect of those that
have embraced Christian Doctrine, the force of Laws, in the times, and
places of persecution, is the decrees they made amongst themselves in
their Synods. For we read (Acts 15.28.) the stile of the Councell of the
Apostles, the Elders, and the whole Church, in this manner, "It seemed
good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burthen
than these necessary things, &C." which is a stile that signifieth a
Power to lay a burthen on them that had received their Doctrine. Now
"to lay a burthen on another," seemeth the same that "to oblige;" and
therefore the Acts of that Councell were Laws to the then Christians.
Neverthelesse, they were no more Laws than are these other Precepts,
"Repent, Be Baptized; Keep the Commandements; Beleeve the Gospel; Come
unto me; Sell all that thou hast; Give it to the poor;" and "Follow
me;" which are not Commands, but Invitations, and Callings of men to
Christianity, like that of Esay 55.1. "Ho, every man that thirsteth,
come yee to the waters, come, and buy wine and milke without money."
For first, the Apostles power was no other than that of our Saviour,
to invite men to embrace the Kingdome of God; which they themselves
acknowledged for a Kingdome (not present, but) to come; and they that
have no Kingdome, can make no Laws. And secondly, if their Acts of
Councell, were Laws, they could not without sin be disobeyed. But we
read not any where, that they who received not the Doctrine of Christ,
did therein sin; but that they died in their sins; that is, that their
sins against the Laws to which they owed obedience, were not pardoned.
And those Laws were the Laws of Nature, and the Civill Laws of the
State, whereto every Christian man had by pact submitted himself. And
therefore by the Burthen, which the Apostles might lay on such as they
had converted, are not to be understood Laws, but Conditions, proposed
to those that sought Salvation; which they might accept, or refuse at
their own perill, without a new sin, though not without the hazard of
being condemned, and excluded out of the Kingdome of God for their sins
past. And therefore of Infidels, S. John saith not, the wrath of God
shall "come" upon them, but "the wrath of God remaineth upon them;"
and not that they shall be condemned; but that "they are condemned
already."(John 3.36, 3.18) Nor can it be conceived, that the benefit
of Faith, "is Remission of sins" unlesse we conceive withall, that the
dammage of Infidelity, is "the Retention of the same sins."

But to what end is it (may some man aske), that the Apostles, and other
Pastors of the Church, after their time, should meet together, to agree
upon what Doctrine should be taught, both for Faith and Manners, if no
man were obliged to observe their Decrees? To this may be answered, that
the Apostles, and Elders of that Councell, were obliged even by their
entrance into it, to teach the Doctrine therein concluded, and decreed
to be taught, so far forth, as no precedent Law, to which they were
obliged to yeeld obedience, was to the contrary; but not that all other
Christians should be obliged to observe, what they taught. For though
they might deliberate what each of them should teach; yet they could
not deliberate what others should do, unless their Assembly had had
a Legislative Power; which none could have but Civill Soveraigns. For
though God be the Soveraign of all the world, we are not bound to take
for his Law, whatsoever is propounded by every man in his name; nor any
thing contrary to the Civill Law, which God hath expressely commanded us
to obey.

Seeing then the Acts of Councell of the Apostles, were then no Laws,
but Councells; much lesse are Laws the Acts of any other Doctors,
or Councells since, if assembled without the Authority of the Civill
Soveraign. And consequently, the Books of the New Testament, though most
perfect Rules of Christian Doctrine, could not be made Laws by any other
authority then that of Kings, or Soveraign Assemblies.

The first Councell, that made the Scriptures we now have, Canon, is not
extant: For that Collection the first Bishop of Rome after S. Peter, is
subject to question: For though the Canonicall books bee there reckoned
up; yet these words, "Sint vobis omnibus Clericis & Laicis Libris
venerandi, &c." containe a distinction of Clergy, and Laity, that was
not in use so neer St. Peters time. The first Councell for setling the
Canonicall Scripture, that is extant, is that of Laodicea, Can. 59.
which forbids the reading of other Books then those in the Churches;
which is a Mandate that is not addressed to every Christian, but to
those onely that had authority to read any publiquely in the Church;
that is, to Ecclesiastiques onely.




Of The Right Of Constituting Ecclesiasticall Officers In The Time Of
The Apostles

Of Ecclesiastical Officers in the time of the Apostles, some were
Magisteriall, some Ministeriall. Magisteriall were the Offices
of preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom of God to Infidels; of
administring the Sacraments, and Divine Service; and of teaching the
Rules of Faith and Manners to those that were converted. Ministeriall
was the Office of Deacons, that is, of them that were appointed to the
administration of the secular necessities of the Church, at such time
as they lived upon a common stock of mony, raised out of the voluntary
contributions of the faithfull.

Amongst the Officers Magisteriall, the first, and principall were the
Apostles; whereof there were at first but twelve; and these were chosen
and constituted by our Saviour himselfe; and their Office was not onely
to Preach, Teach, and Baptize, but also to be Martyrs, (Witnesses of
our Saviours Resurrection.) This Testimony, was the specificall, and
essentiall mark; whereby the Apostleship was distinguished from other
Magistracy Ecclesiasticall; as being necessary for an Apostle, either to
have seen our Saviour after his Resurrection, or to have conversed with
him before, and seen his works, and other arguments of his Divinity,
whereby they might be taken for sufficient Witnesses. And therefore at
the election of a new Apostle in the place of Judas Iscariot, S. Peter
saith (Acts 1.21,22.) "Of these men that have companyed with us, all the
time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the
Baptisme of John unto that same day that he was taken up from us, must
one be ordained to be a Witnesse with us of his Resurrection:" where, by
this word Must, is implyed a necessary property of an Apostle, to have
companyed with the first and prime Apostles in the time that our Saviour
manifested himself in the flesh.




Matthias Made Apostle By The Congregation.

The first Apostle, of those which were not constituted by Christ in the
time he was upon the Earth, was Matthias, chosen in this manner: There
were assembled together in Jerusalem about 120 Christians (Acts 1.15.)
These appointed two, Joseph the Just, and Matthias (ver. 23.) and caused
lots to be drawn; "and (ver. 26.) the Lot fell on Matthias and he was
numbred with the Apostles." So that here we see the ordination of this
Apostle, was the act of the Congregation, and not of St. Peter, nor of
the eleven, otherwise then as Members of the Assembly.




Paul And Barnabas Made Apostles By The Church Of Antioch

After him there was never any other Apostle ordained, but Paul and
Barnabas, which was done (as we read Acts 13.1,2,3.) in this manner.
"There were in the Church that was at Antioch, certaine Prophets, and
Teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of
Cyrene, and Manaen; which had been brought up with Herod the Tetrarch,
and Saul. As they ministred unto the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost
said, ‘Separate mee Barnabas, and Saul for the worke whereunto I have
called them.’ And when they had fasted, and prayed, and laid their hands
on them, they sent them away."

By which it is manifest, that though they were called by the Holy Ghost,
their Calling was declared unto them, and their Mission authorized by
the particular Church of Antioch. And that this their calling was to
the Apostleship, is apparent by that, that they are both called (Acts
14.14.) Apostles: And that it was by vertue of this act of the Church of
Antioch, that they were Apostles, S. Paul declareth plainly (Rom. 1.1.)
in that hee useth the word, which the Holy Ghost used at his calling:
For he stileth himself, "An Apostle separated unto the Gospel of God;"
alluding to the words of the Holy Ghost, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul,
&c." But seeing the work of an Apostle, was to be a Witnesse of
the Resurrection of Christ, and man may here aske, how S. Paul that
conversed not with our Saviour before his passion, could know he was
risen. To which it is easily answered, that our Saviour himself appeared
to him in the way to Damascus, from Heaven, after his Ascension; "and
chose him for a vessell to bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings,
and Children of Israel;" and consequently (having seen the Lord after
his passion) was a competent Witnesse of his Resurrection: And as for
Barnabas, he was a Disciple before the Passion. It is therefore evident
that Paul, and Barnabas were Apostles; and yet chosen, and authorized
(not by the first Apostles alone, but) by the Church of Antioch; as
Matthias was chosen, and authorized by the Church of Jerusalem.




What Offices In The Church Are Magisteriall

Bishop, a word formed in our language, out of the Greek Episcopus,
signifieth an overseer, or Superintendent of any businesse, and
particularly a Pastor or Shepherd; and thence by metaphor was taken, not
only amongst the Jews that were originally Shepherds, but also amongst
the Heathen, to signifie the Office of a King, or any other Ruler,
or Guide of People, whether he ruled by Laws, or Doctrine. And so
the Apostles were the first Christian Bishops, instituted by Christ
himselfe: in which sense the Apostleship of Judas is called (Acts 1.20.)
his Bishoprick. And afterwards, when there were constituted Elders in
the Christian Churches, with charge to guide Christs flock by their
doctrine, and advice; these Elders were also called Bishops. Timothy was
an Elder (which word Elder, in the New Testament is a name of Office, as
well as of Age;) yet he was also a Bishop. And Bishops were then content
with the Title of Elders. Nay S. John himselfe, the Apostle beloved of
our Lord, beginneth his Second Epistle with these words, "The Elder to
the Elect Lady." By which it is evident, that Bishop, Pastor, Elder,
Doctor, that is to say, Teacher, were but so many divers names of
the same Office in the time of the Apostles. For there was then no
government by Coercion, but only by Doctrine, and Perswading. The
Kingdome of God was yet to come, in a new world; so that there could
be no authority to compell in any Church, till the Common-wealth
had embraced the Christian Faith; and consequently no diversity of
Authority, though there were diversity of Employments.

Besides these Magisteriall employments in the Church, namely Apostles,
Bishops, Elders, Pastors, and Doctors, whose calling was to proclaim
Christ to the Jews, and Infidels, and to direct, and teach those that
beleeved we read in the New Testament of no other. For by the names
of Evangelists and Prophets, is not signified any Office, but severall
Gifts, by which severall men were profitable to the Church: as
Evangelists, by writing the life and acts of our Saviour; such as were
S. Matthew and S. John Apostles, and S. Marke and S. Luke Disciples, and
whosoever else wrote of that subject, (as S. Thomas, and S. Barnabas are
said to have done, though the Church have not received the Books
that have gone under their names:) and as Prophets, by the gift of
interpreting the Old Testament; and sometimes by declaring their
speciall Revelations to the Church. For neither these gifts, nor the
gifts of Languages, nor the gift of Casting out Devils, or of Curing
other diseases, nor any thing else did make an Officer in the Church,
save onely the due calling and election to the charge of Teaching.




Ordination Of Teachers

As the Apostles, Matthias, Paul, and Barnabas, were not made by our
Saviour himself, but were elected by the Church, that is, by the
Assembly of Christians; namely, Matthias by the Church of Jerusalem,
and Paul, and Barnabas by the Church of Antioch; so were also the
Presbyters, and Pastors in other Cities, elected by the Churches of
those Cities. For proof whereof, let us consider, first, how S. Paul
proceeded in the Ordination of Presbyters, in the Cities where he had
converted men to the Christian Faith, immediately after he and Barnabas
had received their Apostleship. We read (Acts 14.23.) that "they
ordained Elders in every Church;" which at first sight may be taken for
an Argument, that they themselves chose, and gave them their authority:
But if we consider the Originall text, it will be manifest, that they
were authorized, and chosen by the Assembly of the Christians of each
City. For the words there are, "cheirotonesantes autoispresbuterous kat
ekklesian," that is, "When they had Ordained them Elders by the Holding
up of Hands in every Congregation." Now it is well enough known, that in
all those Cities, the manner of choosing Magistrates, and Officers,
was by plurality of suffrages; and (because the ordinary way of
distinguishing the Affirmative Votes from the Negatives, was by Holding
up of Hands) to ordain an Officer in any of the Cities, was no more
but to bring the people together, to elect them by plurality of Votes,
whether it were by plurality of elevated hands, or by plurality of
voices, or plurality of balls, or beans, or small stones, of which every
man cast in one, into a vessell marked for the Affirmative, or Negative;
for divers Cities had divers customes in that point. It was therefore
the Assembly that elected their own Elders: the Apostles were onely
Presidents of the Assembly to call them together for such Election, and
to pronounce them Elected, and to give them the benediction, which now
is called Consecration. And for this cause they that were Presidents
of the Assemblies, as (in the absence of the Apostles) the Elders were,
were called proestotes, and in Latin Antistities; which words signifie
the Principall Person of the Assembly, whose office was to number the
Votes, and to declare thereby who was chosen; and where the Votes were
equall, to decide the matter in question, by adding his own; which is
the Office of a President in Councell. And (because all the Churches
had their Presbyters ordained in the same manner,) where the word is
Constitute, (as Titus 1.5.) "ina katasteses kata polin presbuterous,"
"For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldest constitute
Elders in every City," we are to understand the same thing; namely, that
hee should call the faithfull together, and ordain them Presbyters by
plurality of suffrages. It had been a strange thing, if in a Town, where
men perhaps had never seen any Magistrate otherwise chosen then by an
Assembly, those of the Town becomming Christians, should so much as have
thought on any other way of Election of their Teachers, and Guides, that
is to say, of their Presbyters, (otherwise called Bishops,) then this of
plurality of suffrages, intimated by S. Paul (Acts 14.23.) in the word
Cheirotonesantes: Nor was there ever any choosing of Bishops, (before
the Emperors found it necessary to regulate them in order to the keeping
of the peace amongst them,) but by the Assemblies of the Christians in
every severall Town.

The same is also confirmed by the continuall practise even to this day,
in the Election of the Bishops of Rome. For if the Bishop of any place,
had the right of choosing another, to the succession of the Pastorall
Office, in any City, at such time as he went from thence, to plant the
same in another place; much more had he had the Right, to appoint his
successour in that place, in which he last resided and dyed: And we find
not, that ever any Bishop of Rome appointed his successor. For they were
a long time chosen by the People, as we may see by the sedition raised
about the Election, between Damascus, and Ursinicus; which Ammianus
Marcellinus saith was so great, that Juventius the Praefect, unable to
keep the peace between them, was forced to goe out of the City; and that
there were above an hundred men found dead upon that occasion in the
Church it self. And though they afterwards were chosen, first, by the
whole Clergy of Rome, and afterwards by the Cardinalls; yet never any
was appointed to the succession by his predecessor. If therefore they
pretended no right to appoint their successors, I think I may reasonably
conclude, they had no right to appoint the new power; which none could
take from the Church to bestow on them, but such as had a lawfull
authority, not onely to Teach, but to Command the Church; which none
could doe, but the Civill Soveraign.




Ministers Of The Church What

The word Minister in the Originall Diakonos signifieth one that
voluntarily doth the businesse of another man; and differeth from a
Servant onely in this, that Servants are obliged by their condition,
to what is commanded them; whereas Ministers are obliged onely by
their undertaking, and bound therefore to no more than that they have
undertaken: So that both they that teach the Word of God, and they that
administer the secular affairs of the Church, are both Ministers, but
they are Ministers of different Persons. For the Pastors of the Church,
called (Acts 6.4.) "The Ministers of the Word," are Ministers of Christ,
whose Word it is: But the Ministery of a Deacon, which is called (verse
2. of the same Chapter) "Serving of Tables," is a service done to the
Church, or Congregation: So that neither any one man, nor the whole
Church, could ever of their Pastor say, he was their Minister; but of
a Deacon, whether the charge he undertook were to serve tables, or
distribute maintenance to the Christians, when they lived in each City
on a common stock, or upon collections, as in the first times, or to
take a care of the House of Prayer, or of the Revenue, or other worldly
businesse of the Church, the whole Congregation might properly call him
their Minister.

For their employment, as Deacons, was to serve the Congregation; though
upon occasion they omitted not to preach the Gospel, and maintain the
Doctrine of Christ, every one according to his gifts, as S. Steven did;
and both to Preach, and Baptize, as Philip did: For that Philip, which
(Act. 8. 5.) Preached the Gospel at Samaria, and (verse 38.) Baptized
the Eunuch, was Philip the Deacon, not Philip the Apostle. For it is
manifest (verse 1.) that when Philip preached in Samaria, the Apostles
were at Jerusalem, and (verse 14.) "When they heard that Samaria had
received the Word of God, sent Peter and John to them;" by imposition of
whose hands, they that were Baptized (verse 15.) received (which before
by the Baptisme of Philip they had not received) the Holy Ghost. For it
was necessary for the conferring of the Holy Ghost, that their Baptisme
should be administred, or confirmed by a Minister of the Word, not by a
Minister of the Church. And therefore to confirm the Baptisme of those
that Philip the Deacon had Baptized, the Apostles sent out of their own
number from Jerusalem to Samaria, Peter, and John; who conferred on them
that before were but Baptized, those graces that were signs of the Holy
Spirit, which at that time did accompany all true Beleevers; which what
they were may be understood by that which S. Marke saith (chap. 16.17.)
"These signs follow them that beleeve in my Name; they shall cast out
Devills; they shall speak with new tongues; They shall take up Serpents,
and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; They shall
lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." This to doe, was it that
Philip could not give; but the Apostles could, and (as appears by this
place) effectually did to every man that truly beleeved, and was by
a Minister of Christ himself Baptized: which power either Christs
Ministers in this age cannot conferre, or else there are very few true
Beleevers, or Christ hath very few Ministers.




And How Chosen What

That the first Deacons were chosen, not by the Apostles, but by a
Congregation of the Disciples; that is, of Christian men of all sorts,
is manifest out of Acts 6. where we read that the Twelve, after the
number of Disciples was multiplyed, called them together, and having
told them, that it was not fit that the Apostles should leave the Word
of God, and serve tables, said unto them (verse 3.) "Brethren looke you
out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and of
Wisdome, whom we may appoint over this businesse." Here it is manifest,
that though the Apostles declared them elected; yet the Congregation
chose them; which also, (verse the fift) is more expressely said, where
it is written, that "the saying pleased the multitude, and they chose
seven, &c."




Of Ecclesiasticall Revenue, Under The Law Of Moses

Under the Old Testament, the Tribe of Levi were onely capable of the
Priesthood, and other inferiour Offices of the Church. The land
was divided amongst the other Tribes (Levi excepted,) which by the
subdivision of the Tribe of Joseph, into Ephraim and Manasses, were
still twelve. To the Tribe of Levi were assigned certain Cities for
their habitation, with the suburbs for their cattell: but for their
portion, they were to have the tenth of the fruits of the land of their
Brethren. Again, the Priests for their maintenance had the tenth of that
tenth, together with part of the oblations, and sacrifices. For God had
said to Aaron (Numb. 18. 20.) "Thou shalt have no inheritance in their
land, neither shalt thou have any part amongst them, I am thy part, and
thine inheritance amongst the Children of Israel." For God being then
King, and having constituted the Tribe of Levi to be his Publique
Ministers, he allowed them for their maintenance, the Publique revenue,
that is to say, the part that God had reserved to himself; which were
Tythes, and Offerings: and that it is which is meant, where God saith, I
am thine inheritance. And therefore to the Levites might not unfitly
be attributed the name of Clergy from Kleros, which signifieth Lot, or
Inheritance; not that they were heirs of the Kingdome of God, more than
other; but that Gods inheritance, was their maintenance. Now seeing
in this time God himself was their King, and Moses, Aaron, and the
succeeding High Priests were his Lieutenants; it is manifest, that the
Right of Tythes, and Offerings was constituted by the Civill Power.

After their rejection of God in the demand of a King, they enjoyed still
the same revenue; but the Right thereof was derived from that, that the
Kings did never take it from them: for the Publique Revenue was at
the disposing of him that was the Publique Person; and that (till the
Captivity) was the King. And again, after the return from the Captivity,
they paid their Tythes as before to the Priest. Hitherto therefore
Church Livings were determined by the Civill Soveraign.




In Our Saviours Time, And After

Of the maintenance of our Saviour, and his Apostles, we read onely they
had a Purse, (which was carried by Judas Iscariot;) and, that of the
Apostles, such as were Fisher-men, did sometimes use their trade; and
that when our Saviour sent the Twelve Apostles to Preach, he forbad them
"to carry Gold, and Silver, and Brasse in their purses, for that
the workman is worthy of his hire:" (Mat. 10. 9,10.) By which it
is probable, their ordinary maintenance was not unsuitable to their
employment; for their employment was (ver. 8.) "freely to give, because
they had freely received;" and their maintenance was the Free Gift of
those that beleeved the good tyding they carryed about of the coming
of the Messiah their Saviour. To which we may adde, that which was
contributed out of gratitude, by such as our Saviour had healed of
diseases; of which are mentioned "Certain women (Luke 8. 2,3.) which had
been healed of evill spirits and infirmities; Mary Magdalen, out of whom
went seven Devills; and Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herods Steward; and
Susanna, and many others, which ministred unto him of their substance.

After our Saviours Ascension, the Christians of every City lived in
Common, (Acts 4. 34.) upon the mony which was made of the sale of their
lands and possessions, and laid down at the feet of the Apostles, of
good will, not of duty; for "whilest the Land remained (saith S. Peter
to Ananias Acts 5.4.) was it not thine? and after it was sold, was it
not in thy power?" which sheweth he needed not to have saved his land,
nor his money by lying, as not being bound to contribute any thing at
all, unlesse he had pleased. And as in the time of the Apostles, so also
all the time downward, till after Constantine the Great, we shall
find, that the maintenance of the Bishops, and Pastors of the Christian
Church, was nothing but the voluntary contribution of them that had
embraced their Doctrine. There was yet no mention of Tythes: but
such was in the time of Constantine, and his Sons, the affection of
Christians to their Pastors, as Ammianus Marcellinus saith (describing
the sedition of Damasus and Ursinicus about the Bishopricke,) that it
was worth their contention, in that the Bishops of those times by the
liberality of their flock, and especially of Matrons, lived splendidly,
were carryed in Coaches, and sumptuous in their fare and apparell.

The Ministers Of The Gospel Lived On The Benevolence Of Their Flocks
But here may some ask, whether the Pastor were then bound to live upon
voluntary contribution, as upon almes, "For who (saith S. Paul 1 Cor. 9.
7.) goeth to war at his own charges? or who feedeth a flock, and eatheth
not of the milke of the flock?" And again, (1 Cor. 9. 13.) "Doe ye not
know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of
the Temple; and they which wait at the Altar, partake with the Altar;"
that is to say, have part of that which is offered at the Altar for
their maintenance? And then he concludeth, "Even so hath the Lord
appointed, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.
From which place may be inferred indeed, that the Pastors of the Church
ought to be maintained by their flocks; but not that the Pastors were to
determine, either the quantity, or the kind of their own allowance, and
be (as it were) their own Carvers. Their allowance must needs therefore
be determined, either by the gratitude, and liberality of every
particular man of their flock, or by the whole Congregation. By the
whole Congregation it could not be, because their Acts were then no
Laws: Therefore the maintenance of Pastors, before Emperours and Civill
Soveraigns had made Laws to settle it, was nothing but Benevolence. They
that served at the Altar lived on what was offered. In what court should
they sue for it, who had no Tribunalls? Or if they had Arbitrators
amongst themselves, who should execute their Judgments, when they had no
power to arme their Officers? It remaineth therefore, that there could
be no certaine maintenance assigned to any Pastors of the Church, but by
the whole Congregation; and then onely, when their Decrees should have
the force (not onely of Canons, but also) of Laws; which Laws could not
be made, but by Emperours, Kings, or other Civill Soveraignes. The Right
of Tythes in Moses Law, could not be applyed to the then Ministers
of the Gospell; because Moses and the High Priests were the Civill
Soveraigns of the people under God, whose Kingdom amongst the Jews was
present; whereas the Kingdome of God by Christ is yet to come.

Hitherto hath been shewn what the Pastors of the Church are; what are
the points of their Commission (as that they were to Preach, to Teach,
to Baptize, to be Presidents in their severall Congregations;) what is
Ecclesiasticall Censure, viz. Excommunication, that is to say, in those
places where Christianity was forbidden by the Civill Laws, a putting
of themselves out of the company of the Excommunicate, and where
Christianity was by the Civill Law commanded, a putting the
Excommunicate out of the Congregations of Christians; who elected the
Pastors and Ministers of the Church, (that it was, the Congregation);
who consecrated and blessed them, (that it was the Pastor); what was
their due revenue, (that it was none but their own possessions,
and their own labour, and the voluntary contributions of devout and
gratefull Christians). We are to consider now, what Office those persons
have, who being Civill Soveraignes, have embraced also the Christian
Faith.




The Civill Soveraign Being A Christian Hath The Right Of Appointing
Pastors

And first, we are to remember, that the Right of Judging what
Doctrines are fit for Peace, and to be taught the Subjects, is in all
Common-wealths inseparably annexed (as hath been already proved cha.
18.) to the Soveraign Power Civill, whether it be in one Man, or in one
Assembly of men. For it is evident to the meanest capacity, that mens
actions are derived from the opinions they have of the Good, or Evill,
which from those actions redound unto themselves; and consequently,
men that are once possessed of an opinion, that their obedience to
the Soveraign Power, will bee more hurtfull to them, than their
disobedience, will disobey the Laws, and thereby overthrow the
Common-wealth, and introduce confusion, and Civill war; for the avoiding
whereof, all Civill Government was ordained. And therefore in all
Common-wealths of the Heathen, the Soveraigns have had the name of
Pastors of the People, because there was no Subject that could lawfully
Teach the people, but by their permission and authority.

This Right of the Heathen Kings, cannot bee thought taken from them by
their conversion to the Faith of Christ; who never ordained, that Kings
for beleeving in him, should be deposed, that is, subjected to any but
himself, or (which is all one) be deprived of the power necessary for
the conservation of Peace amongst their Subjects, and for their defence
against foraign Enemies. And therefore Christian Kings are still the
Supreme Pastors of their people, and have power to ordain what Pastors
they please, to teach the Church, that is, to teach the People committed
to their charge.

Again, let the right of choosing them be (as before the conversion
of Kings) in the Church, for so it was in the time of the Apostles
themselves (as hath been shewn already in this chapter); even so also
the Right will be in the Civill Soveraign, Christian. For in that he is
a Christian, he allowes the Teaching; and in that he is the Soveraign
(which is as much as to say, the Church by Representation,) the
Teachers hee elects, are elected by the Church. And when an Assembly of
Christians choose their Pastor in a Christian Common-wealth, it is the
Soveraign that electeth him, because tis done by his Authority; In the
same manner, as when a Town choose their Maior, it is the act of him
that hath the Soveraign Power: For every act done, is the act of him,
without whose consent it is invalid. And therefore whatsoever examples
may be drawn out of History, concerning the Election of Pastors, by the
People, or by the Clergy, they are no arguments against the Right of
any Civill Soveraign, because they that elected them did it by his
Authority.

Seeing then in every Christian Common-wealth, the Civill Soveraign is
the Supreme Pastor, to whose charge the whole flock of his Subjects is
committed, and consequently that it is by his authority, that all
other Pastors are made, and have power to teach, and performe all
other Pastorall offices; it followeth also, that it is from the Civill
Soveraign, that all other Pastors derive their right of Teaching,
Preaching, and other functions pertaining to that Office; and that they
are but his Ministers; in the same manner as the Magistrates of Towns,
Judges in Courts of Justice, and Commanders of Armies, are all but
Ministers of him that is the Magistrate of the whole Common-wealth,
Judge of all Causes, and Commander of the whole Militia, which is
alwayes the Civill Soveraign. And the reason hereof, is not because they
that Teach, but because they that are to Learn, are his Subjects.
For let it be supposed, that a Christian King commit the Authority of
Ordaining Pastors in his Dominions to another King, (as divers Christian
Kings allow that power to the Pope;) he doth not thereby constitute a
Pastor over himself, nor a Soveraign Pastor over his People; for that
were to deprive himself of the Civill Power; which depending on the
opinion men have of their Duty to him, and the fear they have of
Punishment in another world, would depend also on the skill, and loyalty
of Doctors, who are no lesse subject, not only to Ambition, but also
to Ignorance, than any other sort of men. So that where a stranger hath
authority to appoint Teachers, it is given him by the Soveraign in
whose Dominions he teacheth. Christian Doctors are our Schoolmasters
to Christianity; But Kings are Fathers of Families, and may receive
Schoolmasters for their Subjects from the recommendation of a stranger,
but not from the command; especially when the ill teaching them shall
redound to the great and manifest profit of him that recommends them:
nor can they be obliged to retain them, longer than it is for the
Publique good; the care of which they stand so long charged withall, as
they retain any other essentiall Right of the Soveraignty.




The Pastorall Authority Of Soveraigns Only Is De Jure Divino, That Of
Other Pastors Is Jure Civili

If a man therefore should ask a Pastor, in the execution of his Office,
as the chief Priests and Elders of the people (Mat. 21.23.) asked our
Saviour, "By what authority dost thou these things, and who gave thee
this authority:" he can make no other just Answer, but that he doth
it by the Authority of the Common-wealth, given him by the King, or
Assembly that representeth it. All Pastors, except the Supreme, execute
their charges in the Right, that is by the Authority of the Civill
Soveraign, that is, Jure Civili. But the King, and every other Soveraign
executeth his Office of Supreme Pastor, by immediate Authority from God,
that is to say, In Gods Right, or Jure Divino. And therefore none but
Kings can put into their Titles (a mark of their submission to God onely
) Dei Gratia Rex, &c. Bishops ought to say in the beginning of their
Mandates, "By the favour of the Kings Majesty, Bishop of such a
Diocesse;" or as Civill Ministers, "In his Majesties Name." For in
saying, Divina Providentia, which is the same with Dei Gratia, though
disguised, they deny to have received their authority from the Civill
State; and sliely slip off the Collar of their Civill Subjection,
contrary to the unity and defence of the Common-wealth.




Christian Kings Have Power To Execute All Manner Of Pastoral Function

But if every Christian Soveraign be the Supreme Pastor of his own
Subjects, it seemeth that he hath also the Authority, not only to Preach
(which perhaps no man will deny;) but also to Baptize, and to Administer
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and to Consecrate both Temples, and
Pastors to Gods service; which most men deny; partly because they use
not to do it; and partly because the Administration of Sacraments,
and Consecration of Persons, and Places to holy uses, requireth the
Imposition of such mens hands, as by the like Imposition successively
from the time of the Apostles have been ordained to the like Ministery.
For proof therefore that Christian Kings have power to Baptize, and to
Consecrate, I am to render a reason, both why they use not to doe it,
and how, without the ordinary ceremony of Imposition of hands, they are
made capable of doing it, when they will.

There is no doubt but any King, in case he were skilfull in the
Sciences, might by the same Right of his Office, read Lectures of
them himself, by which he authorizeth others to read them in the
Universities. Neverthelesse, because the care of the summe of the
businesse of the Common-wealth taketh up his whole time, it were not
convenient for him to apply himself in Person to that particular. A King
may also if he please, sit in Judgment, to hear and determine all manner
of Causes, as well as give others authority to doe it in his name; but
that the charge that lyeth upon him of Command and Government, constrain
him to bee continually at the Helm, and to commit the Ministeriall
Offices to others under him. In the like manner our Saviour (who surely
had power to Baptize) Baptized none himselfe, but sent his Apostles and
Disciples to Baptize. (John 4.2.) So also S. Paul, by the necessity of
Preaching in divers and far distant places, Baptized few: Amongst all
the Corinthians he Baptized only Crispus, Cajus, and Stephanus; (1
Cor.1.14,16.) and the reason was, because his principall Charge was to
Preach. (1 Cor. 1.17.) Whereby it is manifest, that the greater Charge,
(such as is the Government of the Church,) is a dispensation for the
lesse. The reason therefore why Christian Kings use not to Baptize, is
evident, and the same, for which at this day there are few Baptized by
Bishops, and by the Pope fewer.

And as concerning Imposition of Hands, whether it be needfull, for the
authorizing of a King to Baptize, and Consecrate, we may consider thus.

Imposition of Hands, was a most ancient publique ceremony amongst the
Jews, by which was designed, and made certain, the person, or other
thing intended in a mans prayer, blessing, sacrifice, consecration,
condemnation, or other speech. So Jacob in blessing the children of
Joseph (Gen. 48.14.) "Laid his right Hand on Ephraim the younger, and
his left Hand on Manasseh the first born;" and this he did Wittingly
(though they were so presented to him by Joseph, as he was forced in
doing it to stretch out his arms acrosse) to design to whom he intended
the greater blessing. So also in the sacrificing of the Burnt offering,
Aaron is commanded (Exod. 29.10.) "to Lay his Hands on the head of the
bullock;" and (ver. 15.) "to Lay his Hand on the head of the ramme."
The same is also said again, Levit. 1.4. & 8.14. Likewise Moses when he
ordained Joshua to be Captain of the Israelites, that is, consecrated
him to Gods service, (Numb. 27.23.) "Laid his hands upon him, and gave
him his Charge," designing and rendring certain, who it was they were
to obey in war. And in the consecration of the Levites (Numb. 8.10.) God
commanded that "the Children of Israel should Put their Hands upon the
Levites." And in the condemnation of him that had blasphemed the Lord
(Levit. 24.14.) God commanded that "all that heard him should Lay their
Hands on his head, and that all the Congregation should stone him." And
why should they only that heard him, Lay their Hands upon him, and not
rather a Priest, Levite, or other Minister of Justice, but that
none else were able to design, and demonstrate to the eyes of the
Congregation, who it was that had blasphemed, and ought to die? And
to design a man, or any other thing, by the Hand to the Eye is lesse
subject to mistake, than when it is done to the Eare by a Name.

And so much was this ceremony observed, that in blessing the whole
Congregation at once, which cannot be done by Laying on of Hands, yet
"Aaron (Levit. 9.22.) did lift up his Hand towards the people when he
blessed them." And we read also of the like ceremony of Consecration of
Temples amongst the Heathen, as that the Priest laid his Hands on
some post of the Temple, all the while he was uttering the words of
Consecration. So naturall it is to design any individuall thing, rather
by the Hand, to assure the Eyes, than by Words to inform the Eare in
matters of Gods Publique service.

This ceremony was not therefore new in our Saviours time. For Jairus
(Mark 5.23.) whose daughter was sick, besought our Saviour (not to heal
her, but) "to Lay his Hands upon her, that shee might bee healed." And
(Matth. 19.13.) "they brought unto him little children, that hee should
Put his Hands on them, and Pray."

According to this ancient Rite, the Apostles, and Presbyters, and the
Presbytery it self, Laid Hands on them whom they ordained Pastors, and
withall prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost; and that
not only once, but sometimes oftner, when a new occasion was presented:
but the end was still the same, namely a punctuall, and religious
designation of the person, ordained either to the Pastorall Charge
in general, or to a particular Mission: so (Act. 6.6.) "The Apostles
Prayed, and Laid their Hands" on the seven Deacons; which was done,
not to give them the Holy Ghost, (for they were full of the Holy Ghost
before thy were chosen, as appeareth immediately before, verse 3.) but
to design them to that Office. And after Philip the Deacon had converted
certain persons in Samaria, Peter and John went down (Act. 8.17.)" and
laid their Hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost." And not
only an Apostle, but a Presbyter had this power: For S. Paul adviseth
Timothy (1 Tim. 5.22.) "Lay Hands suddenly on no man;" that is, designe
no man rashly to the Office of a Pastor. The whole Presbytery Laid their
Hands on Timothy, as we read 1 Tim. 4.14. but this is to be understood,
as that some did it by the appointment of the Presbytery, and most
likely their Proestos, or Prolocutor, which it may be was St. Paul
himself. For in his 2 Epist. to Tim. ver. 6. he saith to him, "Stirre up
the gift of God which is in thee, by the Laying on of my Hands:" where
note by the way, that by the Holy ghost, is not meant the third Person
in the Trinity, but the Gifts necessary to the Pastorall Office. We read
also, that St. Paul had Imposition of Hands twice; once from Ananias at
Damascus (Acts 9.17,18.) at the time of his Baptisme; and again (Acts
13.3.) at Antioch, when he was first sent out to Preach. The use then of
this ceremony considered in the Ordination of Pastors, was to design
the Person to whom they gave such Power. But if there had been then any
Christian, that had had the Power of Teaching before; the Baptizing of
him, that is the making of him a Christian, had given him no new Power,
but had onely caused him to preach true Doctrine, that is, to use
his Power aright; and therefore the Imposition of Hands had been
unnecessary; Baptisme it selfe had been sufficient. But every Soveraign,
before Christianity, had the power of Teaching, and Ordaining Teachers;
and therefore Christianity gave them no new Right, but only directed
them in the way of teaching truth; and consequently they needed
no Imposition of Hands (besides that which is done in Baptisme) to
authorize them to exercise any part of the Pastorall Function, as
namely, to Baptize, and Consecrate. And in the Old Testament, though
the Priest only had right to Consecrate, during the time that the
Soveraignty was in the High Priest; yet it was not so when the
Soveraignty was in the King: For we read (1 Kings 8.) That Solomon
Blessed the People, Consecrated the Temple, and pronounced that Publique
Prayer, which is the pattern now for Consecration of all Christian
Churches, and Chappels: whereby it appears, he had not only the right
of Ecclesiasticall Government; but also of exercising Ecclesiasticall
Functions.




The Civill Soveraigne If A Christian, Is Head Of The Church In His Own
Dominions

From this consolidation of the Right Politique, and Ecclesiastique in
Christian Soveraigns, it is evident, they have all manner of Power over
their Subjects, that can be given to man, for the government of mens
externall actions, both in Policy, and Religion; and may make such
Laws, as themselves shall judge fittest, for the government of their
own Subjects, both as they are the Common-wealth, and as they are the
Church: for both State, and Church are the same men.

If they please therefore, they may (as many Christian Kings now doe)
commit the government of their Subjects in matters of Religion to
the Pope; but then the Pope is in that point Subordinate to them, and
exerciseth that Charge in anothers Dominion Jure Civili, in the Right of
the Civill Soveraign; not Jure Divino, in Gods Right; and may therefore
be discharged of that Office, when the Soveraign for the good of his
Subjects shall think it necessary. They may also if they please,
commit the care of Religion to one Supreme Pastor, or to an Assembly of
Pastors; and give them what power over the Church, or one over another,
they think most convenient; and what titles of honor, as of Bishops,
Archbishops, Priests, or Presbyters, they will; and make such Laws for
their maintenance, either by Tithes, or otherwise, as they please,
so they doe it out of a sincere conscience, of which God onely is
the Judge. It is the Civill Soveraign, that is to appoint Judges, and
Interpreters of the Canonicall Scriptures; for it is he that maketh them
Laws. It is he also that giveth strength to Excommunications; which but
for such Laws and Punishments, as may humble obstinate Libertines, and
reduce them to union with the rest of the Church, would bee
contemned. In summe, he hath the Supreme Power in all causes, as well
Ecclesiasticall, as Civill, as far as concerneth actions, and words, for
these onely are known, and may be accused; and of that which cannot be
accused, there is no Judg at all, but God, that knoweth the heart.
And these Rights are incident to all Soveraigns, whether Monarchs, or
Assemblies: for they that are the Representants of a Christian People,
are Representants of the Church: for a Church, and a Common-wealth of
Christian People, are the same thing.




Cardinal Bellarmines Books De Summo Pontifice Considered

Though this that I have here said, and in other places of this Book,
seem cleer enough for the asserting of the Supreme Ecclesiasticall Power
to Christian Soveraigns; yet because the Pope of Romes challenge to that
Power universally, hath been maintained chiefly, and I think as strongly
as is possible, by Cardinall Bellarmine, in his Controversie De Summo
Pontifice; I have thought it necessary, as briefly as I can, to examine
the grounds, and strength of his Discourse.




The First Book

Of five Books he hath written of this subject, the first containeth
three Questions: One, Which is simply the best government, Monarchy,
Aristocracy, or Democracy; and concludeth for neither, but for a
government mixt of all there: Another, which of these is the best
Government of the Church; and concludeth for the mixt, but which should
most participate of Monarchy: the third, whether in this mixt Monarchy,
St. Peter had the place of Monarch. Concerning his first Conclusion, I
have already sufficiently proved (chapt. 18.) that all Governments which
men are bound to obey, are Simple, and Absolute. In Monarchy there is
but One Man Supreme; and all other men that have any kind of Power in
the State, have it by his Commission, during his pleasure; and execute
it in his name: And in Aristocracy, and Democracy, but One Supreme
Assembly, with the same Power that in Monarchy belongeth to the Monarch,
which is not a Mixt, but an Absolute Soveraignty. And of the three
sorts, which is the best, is not to be disputed, where any one of them
is already established; but the present ought alwaies to be preferred,
maintained, and accounted best; because it is against both the Law of
Nature, and the Divine positive Law, to doe any thing tending to the
subversion thereof. Besides, it maketh nothing to the Power of
any Pastor, (unlesse he have the Civill Soveraignty,) what kind of
Government is the best; because their Calling is not to govern men by
Commandement, but to teach them, and perswade them by Arguments, and
leave it to them to consider, whether they shall embrace, or reject the
Doctrine taught. For Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, do mark out
unto us three sorts of Soveraigns, not of Pastors; or, as we may say,
three sorts of Masters of Families, not three sorts of Schoolmasters for
their children.

And therefore the second Conclusion, concerning the best form of
Government of the Church, is nothing to the question of the Popes Power
without his own Dominions: For in all other Common-wealths his Power (if
hee have any at all) is that of the Schoolmaster onely, and not of the
Master of the Family.

For the third Conclusion, which is, that St. Peter was Monarch of the
Church, he bringeth for his chiefe argument the place of S. Matth.
(chap. 16.18, 19.) "Thou art Peter, And upon this rock I will build my
Church, &c. And I will give thee the keyes of Heaven; whatsoever thou
shalt bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt
loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven." Which place well considered,
proveth no more, but that the Church of Christ hath for foundation one
onely Article; namely, that which Peter in the name of all the Apostles
professing, gave occasion to our Saviour to speak the words here cited;
which that wee may cleerly understand, we are to consider, that our
Saviour preached by himself, by John Baptist, and by his Apostles,
nothing but this Article of Faith, "that he was the Christ;" all other
Articles requiring faith no otherwise, than as founded on that. John
began first, (Mat. 3.2.) preaching only this, "The Kingdome of God is at
hand." Then our Saviour himself (Mat. 4.17.) preached the same: And to
his Twelve Apostles, when he gave them their Commission (Mat. 10.7.)
there is no mention of preaching any other Article but that. This was
the fundamentall Article, that is the Foundation of the Churches Faith.
Afterwards the Apostles being returned to him, he asketh them all, (Mat.
16.13) not Peter onely, "Who men said he was;" and they answered, that
"some said he was John the Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias,
or one of the Prophets:" Then (ver. 15.) he asked them all again, (not
Peter onely) "Whom say yee that I am?" Therefore Peter answered (for
them all) "Thou art Christ, the Son of the Living God;" which I said is
the Foundation of the Faith of the whole Church; from which our Saviour
takes the occasion of saying, "Upon this stone I will build my Church;"
By which it is manifest, that by the Foundation-Stone of the Church, was
meant the Fundamentall Article of the Churches Faith. But why then (will
some object) doth our Saviour interpose these words, "Thou art Peter"?
If the originall of this text had been rigidly translated, the reason
would easily have appeared: We are therefore to consider, that the
Apostle Simon, was surnamed Stone, (which is the signification of
the Syriacke word Cephas, and of the Greek word Petrus). Our Saviour
therefore after the confession of that Fundamentall Article, alluding
to his name, said (as if it were in English) thus, Thou art "Stone," and
upon this Stone I will build my Church: which is as much as to say, this
Article, that "I am the Christ," is the Foundation of all the Faith I
require in those that are to bee members of my Church: Neither is this
allusion to a name, an unusuall thing in common speech: But it had been
a strange, and obscure speech, if our Saviour intending to build his
Church on the Person of St. Peter, had said, "thou art a Stone, and
upon this Stone I will build my Church," when it was so obvious without
ambiguity to have said, "I will build my Church on thee; and yet there
had been still the same allusion to his name.

And for the following words, "I will give thee the Keyes of Heaven, &c."
it is no more than what our Saviour gave also to all the rest of his
Disciples (Matth. 18.18.) "Whatsoever yee shall bind on Earth, shall be
bound in Heaven. And whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed
in Heaven." But howsoever this be interpreted, there is no doubt but
the Power here granted belongs to all Supreme Pastors; such as are all
Christian Civill Soveraignes in their own Dominions. In so much, as if
St. Peter, or our Saviour himself had converted any of them to beleeve
him, and to acknowledge his Kingdome; yet because his Kingdome is not of
this world, he had left the supreme care of converting his subjects to
none but him; or else hee must have deprived him of the Soveraignty,
to which the Right of Teaching is inseparably annexed. And thus much in
refutation of his first Book, wherein hee would prove St. Peter to have
been the Monarch Universall of the Church, that is to say, of all the
Christians in the world.




The Second Book

The second Book hath two Conclusions: One, that S. Peter was Bishop
of Rome, and there dyed: The other, that the Popes of Rome are his
Successors. Both which have been disputed by others. But supposing them
to be true; yet if by Bishop of Rome bee understood either the
Monarch of the Church, or the Supreme Pastor of it; not Silvester, but
Constantine (who was the first Christian Emperour) was that Bishop; and
as Constantine, so all other Christian Emperors were of Right supreme
Bishops of the Roman Empire; I say of the Roman Empire, not of all
Christendome: For other Christian Soveraigns had the same Right in their
severall Territories, as to an Office essentially adhaerent to their
Soveraignty. Which shall serve for answer to his second Book.




The Third Book

In the third Book, he handleth the question whether the Pope be
Antichrist. For my part, I see no argument that proves he is so, in that
sense that Scripture useth the name: nor will I take any argument from
the quality of Antichrist, to contradict the Authority he exerciseth,
or hath heretofore exercised in the Dominions of any other Prince, or
State.

It is evident that the Prophets of the Old Testament foretold, and the
Jews expected a Messiah, that is, a Christ, that should re-establish
amongst them the kingdom of God, which had been rejected by them in
the time of Samuel, when they required a King after the manner of
other Nations. This expectation of theirs, made them obnoxious to the
Imposture of all such, as had both the ambition to attempt the attaining
of the Kingdome, and the art to deceive the People by counterfeit
miracles, by hypocriticall life, or by orations and doctrine plausible.
Our Saviour therefore, and his Apostles forewarned men of False
Prophets, and of False Christs. False Christs, are such as pretend to
be the Christ, but are not, and are called properly Antichrists, in such
sense, as when there happeneth a Schisme in the Church by the election
of two Popes, the one calleth the other Antipapa, or the false Pope.
And therefore Antichrist in the proper signification hath two essentiall
marks; One, that he denyeth Jesus to be Christ; and another that he
professeth himselfe to bee Christ. The first Mark is set down by S. John
in his 1 Epist. 4. ch. 3. ver. "Every Spirit that confesseth not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God; And this is the Spirit
of Antichrist." The other Mark is expressed in the words of our Saviour,
(Mat. 24.5.) "Many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ;" and
again, "If any man shall say unto you, Loe, here is Christ, there is
Christ beleeve it not." And therefore Antichrist must be a False Christ,
that is, some one of them that shall pretend themselves to be Christ.
And out of these two Marks, "to deny Jesus to be the Christ," and to
"affirm himselfe to be the Christ," it followeth, that he must also be
an "Adversary of the true Christ," which is another usuall signification
of the word Antichrist. But of these many Antichrists, there is one
speciall one, O Antichristos, The Antichrist, or Antichrist definitely,
as one certaine person; not indefinitely An Antichrist. Now seeing the
Pope of Rome, neither pretendeth himself, nor denyeth Jesus to be the
Christ, I perceive not how he can be called Antichrist; by which word
is not meant, one that falsely pretendeth to be His Lieutenant, or Vicar
Generall, but to be Hee. There is also some Mark of the time of this
speciall Antichrist, as (Mat. 24.15.) when that abominable Destroyer,
spoken of by Daniel, (Dan. 9. 27.) shall stand in the Holy place, and
such tribulation as was not since the beginning of the world, nor ever
shall be again, insomuch as if it were to last long, (ver. 22.) "no
flesh could be saved; but for the elects sake those days shall be
shortened" (made fewer). But that tribulation is not yet come; for it
is to be followed immediately (ver. 29.) by a darkening of the Sun
and Moon, a falling of the Stars, a concussion of the Heavens, and the
glorious coming again of our Saviour, in the cloudes. And therefore The
Antichrist is not yet come; whereas, many Popes are both come and gone.
It is true, the Pope in taking upon him to give Laws to all Christian
Kings, and Nations, usurpeth a Kingdome in this world, which Christ took
not on him: but he doth it not As Christ, but as For Christ, wherein
there is nothing of the Antichrist.




The Fourth Book

In the fourth Book, to prove the Pope to be the supreme Judg in all
questions of Faith and Manners, (which is as much as to be the absolute
Monarch of all Christians in the world,) be bringeth three Propositions:
The first, that his Judgments are Infallible: The second, that he can
make very Laws, and punish those that observe them not: The third, that
our Saviour conferred all Jurisdiction Ecclesiasticall on the Pope of
Rome.




Texts For The Infallibility Of The Popes Judgement In Points Of Faith

For the Infallibility of his Judgments, he alledgeth the Scriptures: and
first, that of Luke 22.31. "Simon, Simon, Satan hath desired you that
hee may sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
faile not; and when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren." This,
according to Bellarmines exposition, is, that Christ gave here to Simon
Peter two priviledges: one, that neither his Faith should fail, neither
he, nor any of his successors should ever define any point concerning
Faith, or Manners erroneously, or contrary to the definition of a former
Pope: Which is a strange, and very much strained interpretation. But he
that with attention readeth that chapter, shall find there is no place
in the whole Scripture, that maketh more against the Popes Authority,
than this very place. The Priests and Scribes seeking to kill our
Saviour at the Passeover, and Judas possessed with a resolution to
betray him, and the day of killing the Passeover being come, our Saviour
celebrated the same with his Apostles, which he said, till the Kingdome
of God was come hee would doe no more; and withall told them, that one
of them was to betray him: Hereupon they questioned, which of them it
should be; and withall (seeing the next Passeover their Master would
celebrate should be when he was King) entred into a contention, who
should then be the greater man. Our Saviour therefore told them, that
the Kings of the Nations had Dominion over their Subjects, and are
called by a name (in Hebrew) that signifies Bountifull; but I cannot
be so to you, you must endeavour to serve one another; I ordain you a
Kingdome, but it is such as my Father hath ordained mee; a Kingdome that
I am now to purchase with my blood, and not to possesse till my second
coming; then yee shall eat and drink at my Table, and sit on Thrones,
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel: And then addressing himself to
St. Peter, he saith, Simon, Simon, Satan seeks by suggesting a present
domination, to weaken your faith of the future; but I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith shall not fail; Thou therefore (Note this,) being
converted, and understanding my Kingdome as of another world, confirm
the same faith in thy Brethren: To which S. Peter answered (as one that
no more expected any authority in this world) "Lord I am ready to goe
with thee, not onely to Prison, but to Death." Whereby it is manifest,
S. Peter had not onely no jurisdiction given him in this world, but a
charge to teach all the other Apostles, that they also should have none.
And for the Infallibility of St. Peters sentence definitive in matter
of Faith, there is no more to be attributed to it out of this Text, than
that Peter should continue in the beleef of this point, namely, that
Christ should come again, and possesse the Kingdome at the day of
Judgement; which was not given by the Text to all his Successors; for
wee see they claim it in the World that now is.

The second place is that of Matth. 16. "Thou art Peter, and upon this
rocke I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it." By which (as I have already shewn in this chapter) is
proved no more, than that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against
the confession of Peter, which gave occasion to that speech; namely
this, That Jesus Is Christ The Sonne Of God.

The third text is John 21. ver. 16,17. "Feed my sheep;" which contains
no more but a Commission of Teaching: And if we grant the rest of the
Apostles to be contained in that name of Sheep; then it is the supreme
Power of Teaching: but it was onely for the time that there were no
Christian Soveraigns already possessed of that Supremacy. But I have
already proved, that Christian Soveraignes are in their owne Dominions
the supreme Pastors, and instituted thereto, by vertue of their being
Baptized, though without other Imposition of Hands. For such imposition
being a Ceremony of designing the person, is needlesse, when hee is
already designed to the Power of Teaching what Doctrine he will, by his
institution to an Absolute Power over his Subjects. For as I have proved
before, Soveraigns are supreme Teachers (in generall) by their Office
and therefore oblige themselves (by their Baptisme) to teach the
Doctrine of Christ: And when they suffer others to teach their people,
they doe it at the perill of their own souls; for it is at the hands
of the Heads of Families that God will require the account of the
instruction of his Children and Servants. It is of Abraham himself,
not of a hireling, that God saith (Gen. 18.19) "I know him that he will
command his Children, and his houshold after him, that they keep the way
of the Lord, and do justice and judgement.

The fourth place is that of Exod. 28.30. "Thou shalt put in the
Breastplate of Judgment, the Urim and the Thummin:" which hee saith is
interpreted by the Septuagint, delosin kai aletheian, that is, Evidence
and Truth: And thence concludeth, God had given Evidence, and Truth,
(which is almost infallibility,) to the High Priest. But be it Evidence
and Truth it selfe that was given; or be it but Admonition to the Priest
to endeavour to inform himself cleerly, and give judgment uprightly;
yet in that it was given to the High Priest, it was given to the Civill
Soveraign: For next under God was the High Priest in the Common-wealth
of Israel; and is an argument for Evidence and Truth, that is, for the
Ecclesiasticall Supremacy of Civill Soveraigns over their own Subjects,
against the pretended Power of the Pope. These are all the Texts hee
bringeth for the Infallibility of the Judgement of the Pope, in point of
Faith.




Texts For The Same In Point Of Manners

For the Infallibility of his Judgment concerning Manners, hee bringeth
one Text, which is that of John 16.13. "When the Spirit of truth is
come, hee will lead you into all truth" where (saith he) by All Truth,
is meant, at least, All Truth Necessary To Salvation. But with this
mitigation, he attributeth no more Infallibility to the Pope, than to
any man that professeth Christianity, and is not to be damned: For
if any man erre in any point, wherein not to erre is necessary to
Salvation, it is impossible he should be saved; for that onely is
necessary to Salvation, without which to be saved is impossible. What
points these are, I shall declare out of the Scripture in the Chapter
following. In this place I say no more, but that though it were granted,
the Pope could not possibly teach any error at all, yet doth not this
entitle him to any Jurisdiction in the Dominions of another Prince,
unlesse we shall also say, a man is obliged in conscience to set on
work upon all occasions the best workman, even then also when he hath
formerly promised his work to another.

Besides the Text, he argueth from Reason, thus, If the Pope could erre
in necessaries, then Christ hath not sufficiently provided for the
Churches Salvation; because he hath commanded her to follow the Popes
directions. But this Reason is invalid, unlesse he shew when, and where
Christ commanded that, or took at all any notice of a Pope: Nay granting
whatsoever was given to S. Peter was given to the Pope; yet seeing there
is in the Scripture no command to any man to obey St. Peter, no man can
bee just, that obeyeth him, when his commands are contrary to those of
his lawfull Soveraign.

Lastly, it hath not been declared by the Church, nor by the Pope
himselfe, that he is the Civill Soveraign of all the Christians in the
world; and therefore all Christians are not bound to acknowledge his
Jurisdiction in point of Manners. For the Civill Soveraignty, and
supreme Judicature in controversies of Manners, are the same thing: And
the Makers of Civill Laws, are not onely Declarers, but also Makers
of the justice, and injustice of actions; there being nothing in mens
Manners that makes them righteous, or unrighteous, but their conformity
with the Law of the Soveraign. And therefore when the Pope challengeth
Supremacy in controversies of Manners, hee teacheth men to disobey the
Civill Soveraign; which is an erroneous Doctrine, contrary to the
many precepts of our Saviour and his Apostles, delivered to us in the
Scripture.

To prove the Pope has Power to make Laws, he alledgeth many places; as
first, Deut. 17.12. "The man that will doe presumptuously, and will not
hearken unto the Priest, (that standeth to Minister there before the
Lord thy God, or unto the Judge,) even that man shall die, and thou
shalt put away the evill from Israel." For answer whereunto, we are to
remember that the High Priest (next and immediately under God) was the
Civill Soveraign; and all Judges were to be constituted by him. The
words alledged sound therefore thus. "The man that will presume to
disobey the Civill Soveraign for the time being, or any of his Officers
in the execution of their places, that man shall die, &c." which is
cleerly for the Civill Soveraignty, against the Universall power of the
Pope.

Secondly, he alledgeth that of Matth. 16. "Whatsoever yee shall bind,
&c." and interpreteth it for such Binding as is attributed (Matth.
23.4.) to the Scribes and Pharisees, "They bind heavy burthens, and
grievous to be born, and lay them on mens shoulders;" by which is meant
(he sayes) Making of Laws; and concludes thence, the Pope can make
Laws. But this also maketh onely for the Legislative power of Civill
Soveraigns: For the Scribes, and Pharisees sat in Moses Chaire,
but Moses next under God was Soveraign of the People of Israel: and
therefore our Saviour commanded them to doe all that they should say,
but not all that they should do. That is, to obey their Laws, but not
follow their Example.

The third place, is John 21.16. "Feed my sheep;" which is not a Power
to make Laws, but a command to Teach. Making Laws belongs to the Lord of
the Family; who by his owne discretion chooseth his Chaplain, as also a
Schoolmaster to Teach his children.

The fourth place John 20.21. is against him. The words are, "As my
Father sent me, so send I you." But our Saviour was sent to Redeem (by
his Death) such as should Beleeve; and by his own, and his Apostles
preaching to prepare them for their entrance into his Kingdome; which he
himself saith, is not of this world, and hath taught us to pray for the
coming of it hereafter, though hee refused (Acts 1.6,7.) to tell his
Apostles when it should come; and in which, when it comes, the twelve
Apostles shall sit on twelve Thrones (every one perhaps as high as that
of St. Peter) to judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Seeing then God the
Father sent not our Saviour to make Laws in this present world, wee may
conclude from the Text, that neither did our Saviour send S. Peter to
make Laws here, but to perswade men to expect his second comming with
a stedfast faith; and in the mean time, if Subjects, to obey their
Princes; and if Princes, both to beleeve it themselves, and to do their
best to make their Subjects doe the same; which is the Office of a
Bishop. Therefore this place maketh most strongly for the joining of the
Ecclesiasticall Supremacy to the Civill Soveraignty, contrary to that
which Cardinall Bellarmine alledgeth it for.

The fift place is Acts 15.28. "It hath seemed good to the Holy Spirit,
and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden, than these necessary
things, that yee abstaine from meats offered to Idols, and from bloud,
and from things strangled, and from fornication." Here hee notes the
word Laying Of Burdens for the Legislative Power. But who is there,
that reading this Text, can say, this stile of the Apostles may not as
properly be used in giving Counsell, as in making Laws? The stile of a
Law is, We Command: But, We Think Good, is the ordinary stile of them,
that but give Advice; and they lay a Burthen that give Advice, though
it bee conditionall, that is, if they to whom they give it, will
attain their ends: And such is the Burthen, of abstaining from things
strangled, and from bloud; not absolute, but in case they will not
erre. I have shewn before (chap. 25.) that Law, is distinguished from
Counsell, in this, that the reason of a Law, is taken from the designe,
and benefit of him that prescribeth it; but the reason of a Counsell,
from the designe, and benefit of him, to whom the Counsell is given. But
here, the Apostles aime onely at the benefit of the converted Gentiles,
namely their Salvation; not at their own benefit; for having done their
endeavour, they shall have their reward, whether they be obeyed, or not.
And therefore the Acts of this Councell, were not Laws, but Counsells.

The sixt place is that of Rom. 13. "Let every Soul be subject to the
Higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God;" which is meant, he
saith not onely of Secular, but also of Ecclesiasticall Princes. To
which I answer, first, that there are no Ecclesiasticall Princes but
those that are also Civill Soveraignes; and their Principalities exceed
not the compasse of their Civill Soveraignty; without those bounds
though they may be received for Doctors, they cannot be acknowledged for
Princes. For if the Apostle had meant, we should be subject both to our
own Princes, and also to the Pope, he had taught us a doctrine, which
Christ himself hath told us is impossible, namely, "to serve two
Masters." And though the Apostle say in another place, "I write these
things being absent, lest being present I should use sharpnesse,
according to the Power which the Lord hath given me;" it is not, that
he challenged a Power either to put to death, imprison, banish, whip,
or fine any of them, which are Punishments; but onely to Excommunicate,
which (without the Civill Power) is no more but a leaving of their
company, and having no more to doe with them, than with a Heathen man,
or a Publican; which in many occasions might be a greater pain to the
Excommunicant, than to the Excommunicate.

The seventh place is 1 Cor. 4.21. "Shall I come unto you with a Rod, or
in love, and the spirit of lenity?" But here again, it is not the Power
of a Magistrate to punish offenders, that is meant by a Rod; but
onely the Power of Excommunication, which is not in its owne nature
a Punishment, but onely a Denouncing of punishment, that Christ shall
inflict, when he shall be in possession of his Kingdome, at the day of
Judgment. Nor then also shall it bee properly a Punishment, as upon a
Subject that hath broken the Law; but a Revenge, as upon an Enemy, or
Revolter, that denyeth the Right of our Saviour to the Kingdome: And
therefore this proveth not the Legislative Power of any Bishop, that has
not also the Civill Power.

The eighth place is, Timothy 3.2. "A Bishop must be the husband but of
one wife, vigilant, sober, &c." which he saith was a Law. I thought that
none could make a Law in the Church, but the Monarch of the Church, St.
Peter. But suppose this Precept made by the authority of St. Peter;
yet I see no reason why to call it a Law, rather than an Advice, seeing
Timothy was not a Subject, but a Disciple of St. Paul; nor the flock
under the charge of Timothy, his Subjects in the Kingdome, but his
Scholars in the Schoole of Christ: If all the Precepts he giveth
Timothy, be Laws, why is not this also a Law, "Drink no longer water,
but use a little wine for thy healths sake"? And why are not also
the Precepts of good Physitians, so many Laws? but that it is not the
Imperative manner of speaking, but an absolute Subjection to a Person,
that maketh his Precept Laws.

In like manner, the ninth place, 1 Tim. 5. 19. "Against an Elder
receive not an accusation, but before two or three Witnesses," is a wise
Precept, but not a Law.

The tenth place is, Luke 10.16. "He that heareth you, heareth mee; and
he that despiseth you, despiseth me." And there is no doubt, but he that
despiseth the Counsell of those that are sent by Christ, despiseth
the Counsell of Christ himself. But who are those now that are sent by
Christ, but such as are ordained Pastors by lawfull Authority? and who
are lawfully ordained, that are not ordained by the Soveraign
Pastor? and who is ordained by the Soveraign Pastor in a Christian
Common-wealth, that is not ordained by the authority of the Soveraign
thereof? Out of this place therefore it followeth, that he which heareth
his Soveraign being a Christian, heareth Christ; and hee that despiseth
the Doctrine which his King being a Christian, authorizeth, despiseth
the Doctrine of Christ (which is not that which Bellarmine intendeth
here to prove, but the contrary). But all this is nothing to a Law. Nay
more, a Christian King, as a Pastor, and Teacher of his Subjects, makes
not thereby his Doctrines Laws. He cannot oblige men to beleeve; though
as a Civill Soveraign he may make Laws suitable to his Doctrine, which
may oblige men to certain actions, and sometimes to such as they would
not otherwise do, and which he ought not to command; and yet when
they are commanded, they are Laws; and the externall actions done in
obedience to them, without the inward approbation, are the actions of
the Soveraign, and not of the Subject, which is in that case but as
an instrument, without any motion of his owne at all; because God hath
commanded to obey them.

The eleventh, is every place, where the Apostle for Counsell, putteth
some word, by which men use to signifie Command; or calleth the
following of his Counsell, by the name of Obedience. And therefore they
are alledged out of 1 Cor. 11.2. "I commend you for keeping my Precepts
as I delivered them to you." The Greek is, "I commend you for keeping
those things I delivered to you, as I delivered them." Which is far from
signifying that they were Laws, or any thing else, but good Counsell.
And that of 1 Thess. 4.2. "You know what commandements we gave you:"
where the Greek word is paraggelias edokamen, equivalent to paredokamen,
what wee delivered to you, as in the place next before alledged, which
does not prove the Traditions of the Apostles, to be any more than
Counsells; though as is said in the 8th verse, "he that despiseth them,
despiseth not man, but God": For our Saviour himself came not to Judge,
that is, to be King in this world; but to Sacrifice himself for Sinners,
and leave Doctors in his Church, to lead, not to drive men to Christ,
who never accepteth forced actions, (which is all the Law produceth,)
but the inward conversion of the heart; which is not the work of Laws,
but of Counsell, and Doctrine.

And that of 2 Thess. 3.14. "If any man Obey not our word by this
Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may bee
ashamed": where from the word Obey, he would inferre, that this Epistle
was a Law to the Thessalonians. The Epistles of the Emperours were
indeed Laws. If therefore the Epistle of S. Paul were also a Law, they
were to obey two Masters. But the word Obey, as it is in the Greek
upakouei, signifieth Hearkening To, or Putting In Practice, not onely
that which is Commanded by him that has right to punish, but also that
which is delivered in a way of Counsell for our good; and therefore St.
Paul does not bid kill him that disobeys, nor beat, nor imprison, nor
amerce him, which Legislators may all do; but avoid his company, that
he may bee ashamed: whereby it is evident, it was not the Empire of an
Apostle, but his Reputation amongst the Faithfull, which the Christians
stood in awe of.

The last place is that of Heb. 13.17. "Obey your Leaders, and submit
your selves to them, for they watch for your souls, as they that must
give account:" And here also is intended by Obedience, a following of
their Counsell: For the reason of our Obedience, is not drawn from the
will and command of our Pastors, but from our own benefit, as being the
Salvation of our Souls they watch for, and not for the Exaltation of
their own Power, and Authority. If it were meant here, that all they
teach were Laws, then not onely the Pope, but every Pastor in his Parish
should have Legislative Power. Again, they that are bound to obey, their
Pastors, have no power to examine their commands. What then shall wee
say to St. John who bids us (1 Epist. chap. 4. ver. 1.) "Not to beleeve
every Spirit, but to try the Spirits whether they are of God, because
many false Prophets are gone out into the world"? It is therefore
manifest, that wee may dispute the Doctrine of our Pastors; but no man
can dispute a Law. The Commands of Civill Soveraigns are on all sides
granted to be Laws: if any else can make a Law besides himselfe, all
Common-wealth, and consequently all Peace, and Justice must cease; which
is contrary to all Laws, both Divine and Humane. Nothing therefore can
be drawn from these, or any other places of Scripture, to prove the
Decrees of the Pope, where he has not also the Civill Soveraignty, to be
Laws.

The Question Of Superiority Between The Pope And Other Bishops The last
point hee would prove, is this, "That our Saviour Christ has committed
Ecclesiasticall Jurisdiction immediately to none but the Pope." Wherein
he handleth not the Question of Supremacy between the Pope and Christian
Kings, but between the Pope and other Bishops. And first, he sayes it is
agreed, that the Jurisdiction of Bishops, is at least in the generall
De Jure Divino, that is, in the Right of God; for which he alledges S.
Paul, Ephes. 4.11. where hee sayes, that Christ after his Ascension
into heaven, "gave gifts to men, some Apostles, some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, and some Teachers:" And thence inferres,
they have indeed their Jurisdiction in Gods Right; but will not grant
they have it immediately from God, but derived through the Pope. But if
a man may be said to have his Jurisdiction De Jure Divino, and yet not
immediately; what lawfull Jurisdiction, though but Civill, is there in a
Christian Common-wealth, that is not also De Jure Divino? For Christian
Kings have their Civill Power from God immediately; and the Magistrates
under him exercise their severall charges in vertue of his Commission;
wherein that which they doe, is no lesse De Jure Divino Mediato, than
that which the Bishops doe, in vertue of the Popes Ordination. All
lawfull Power is of God, immediately in the Supreme Governour, and
mediately in those that have Authority under him: So that either hee
must grant every Constable in the State, to hold his Office in the Right
of God; or he must not hold that any Bishop holds his so, besides the
Pope himselfe.

But this whole Dispute, whether Christ left the Jurisdiction to the Pope
onely, or to other Bishops also, if considered out of these places where
the Pope has the Civill Soveraignty, is a contention De Lana Caprina:
For none of them (where they are not Soveraigns) has any Jurisdiction
at all. For Jurisdiction is the Power of hearing and determining Causes
between man and man; and can belong to none, but him that hath the Power
to prescribe the Rules of Right and Wrong; that is, to make Laws;
and with the Sword of Justice to compell men to obey his Decisions,
pronounced either by himself, or by the Judges he ordaineth thereunto;
which none can lawfully do, but the Civill Soveraign.

Therefore when he alledgeth out of the 6 of Luke, that our Saviour
called his Disciples together, and chose twelve of them which he named
Apostles, he proveth that he Elected them (all, except Matthias, Paul
and Barnabas,) and gave them Power and Command to Preach, but not
to Judge of Causes between man and man: for that is a Power which
he refused to take upon himselfe, saying, "Who made me a Judge, or a
Divider, amongst you?" and in another place, "My Kingdome is not of this
world." But hee that hath not the Power to hear, and determine Causes
between man and man, cannot be said to have any Jurisdiction at all. And
yet this hinders not, but that our Saviour gave them Power to Preach and
Baptize in all parts of the world, supposing they were not by their own
lawfull Soveraign forbidden: For to our own Soveraigns Christ himself,
and his Apostles have in sundry places expressely commanded us in all
things to be obedient.

The arguments by which he would prove, that Bishops receive their
Jurisdiction from the Pope (seeing the Pope in the Dominions of other
Princes hath no Jurisdiction himself,) are all in vain. Yet because they
prove, on the contrary, that all Bishops receive Jurisdiction when they
have it from their Civill Soveraigns, I will not omit the recitall of
them.

The first, is from Numbers 11. where Moses not being able alone to
undergoe the whole burthen of administring the affairs of the People of
Israel, God commanded him to choose Seventy Elders, and took part of
the spirit of Moses, to put it upon those Seventy Elders: by which it is
understood, not that God weakened the spirit of Moses, for that had not
eased him at all; but that they had all of them their authority from
him; wherein he doth truly, and ingenuously interpret that place. But
seeing Moses had the entire Soveraignty in the Common-wealth of the
Jews, it is manifest, that it is thereby signified, that they had their
Authority from the Civill Soveraign: and therefore that place proveth,
that Bishops in every Christian Common-wealth have their Authority from
the Civill Soveraign; and from the Pope in his own Territories only, and
not in the Territories of any other State.

The second argument, is from the nature of Monarchy; wherein all
Authority is in one Man, and in others by derivation from him: But the
Government of the Church, he says, is Monarchicall. This also makes for
Christian Monarchs. For they are really Monarchs of their own people;
that is, of their own Church (for the Church is the same thing with a
Christian people;) whereas the Power of the Pope, though hee were
S. Peter, is neither Monarchy, nor hath any thing of Archicall, nor
Craticall, but onely of Didacticall; For God accepteth not a forced, but
a willing obedience.

The third, is, from that the Sea of S. Peter is called by S. Cyprian,
the Head, the Source, the Roote, the Sun, from whence the Authority
of Bishops is derived. But by the Law of Nature (which is a better
Principle of Right and Wrong, than the word of any Doctor that is but
a man) the Civill Soveraign in every Common-wealth, is the Head, the
Source, the Root, and the Sun, from which all Jurisdiction is derived.
And therefore, the Jurisdiction of Bishops, is derived from the Civill
Soveraign.

The fourth, is taken from the Inequality of their Jurisdictions: For
if God (saith he) had given it them immediately, he had given aswell
Equality of Jurisdiction, as of Order: But wee see, some are Bishops but
of own Town, some of a hundred Towns, and some of many whole Provinces;
which differences were not determined by the command of God; their
Jurisdiction therefore is not of God, but of Man; and one has a
greater, another a lesse, as it pleaseth the Prince of the Church. Which
argument, if he had proved before, that the Pope had had an Universall
Jurisdiction over all Christians, had been for his purpose. But seeing
that hath not been proved, and that it is notoriously known, the large
Jurisdiction of the Pope was given him by those that had it, that is,
by the Emperours of Rome, (for the Patriarch of Constantinople, upon the
same title, namely, of being Bishop of the Capitall City of the Empire,
and Seat of the Emperour, claimed to be equal to him,) it followeth,
that all other Bishops have their Jurisdiction from the Soveraigns of
the place wherein they exercise the same: And as for that cause they
have not their Authority De Jure Divino; so neither hath the Pope his De
Jure Divino, except onely where hee is also the Civill Soveraign.

His fift argument is this, "If Bishops have their Jurisdiction
immediately from God, the Pope could not take it from them, for he can
doe nothing contrary to Gods ordination;" And this consequence is good,
and well proved. "But, (saith he) the Pope can do this, and has done
it." This also is granted, so he doe it in his own Dominions, or in the
Dominions of any other Prince that hath given him that Power; but not
universally, in Right of the Popedome: For that power belongeth to
every Christian Soveraign, within the bounds of his owne Empire, and is
inseparable from the Soveraignty. Before the People of Israel had (by
the commandment of God to Samuel) set over themselves a King, after the
manner of other Nations, the High Priest had the Civill Government; and
none but he could make, nor depose an inferiour Priest: But that Power
was afterwards in the King, as may be proved by this same argument of
Bellarmine; For if the Priest (be he the High Priest or any other) had
his Jurisdiction immediately from God, then the King could not take it
from him; "for he could do nothing contrary to Gods ordinance: But it
is certain, that King Solomon (1 Kings 2.26.) deprived Abiathar the High
Priest of his office, and placed Zadok (verse 35.) in his room. Kings
therefore may in the like manner Ordaine, and Deprive Bishops, as they
shall thinke fit, for the well governing of their Subjects.

His sixth argument is this, If Bishops have their Jurisdiction De Jure
Divino (that is, immediately from God,) they that maintaine it, should
bring some Word of God to prove it: But they can bring none. The
argument is good; I have therefore nothing to say against it. But it
is an argument no lesse good, to prove the Pope himself to have no
Jurisdiction in the Dominion of any other Prince.

Lastly, hee bringeth for argument, the testimony of two Popes, Innocent,
and Leo; and I doubt not but hee might have alledged, with as good
reason, the testimonies of all the Popes almost since S. Peter: For
considering the love of Power naturally implanted in mankind, whosoever
were made Pope, he would be tempted to uphold the same opinion.
Neverthelesse, they should therein but doe, as Innocent, and Leo did,
bear witnesse of themselves, and therefore their witness should not be
good.




Of The Popes Temporall Power

In the fift Book he hath four Conclusions. The first is, "That the Pope
in not Lord of all the world:" the second, "that the Pope is not Lord
of all the Christian world:" The third, "That the Pope (without his owne
Territory) has not any Temporall Jurisdiction DIRECTLY:" These three
Conclusions are easily granted. The fourth is, "That the Pope has (in
the Dominions of other Princes) the Supreme Temporall Power INDIRECTLY:"
which is denyed; unlesse he mean by Indirectly, that he has gotten it by
Indirect means; then is that also granted. But I understand, that
when he saith he hath it Indirectly, he means, that such Temporall
Jurisdiction belongeth to him of Right, but that this Right is but a
Consequence of his Pastorall Authority, the which he could not exercise,
unlesse he have the other with it: And therefore to the Pastorall Power
(which he calls Spirituall) the Supreme Power Civill is necessarily
annexed; and that thereby hee hath a Right to change Kingdomes, giving
them to one, and taking them from another, when he shall think it
conduces to the Salvation of Souls.

Before I come to consider the Arguments by which hee would prove this
doctrine, it will not bee amisse to lay open the Consequences of it;
that Princes, and States, that have the Civill Soveraignty in their
severall Common-wealths, may bethink themselves, whether it bee
convenient for them, and conducing to the good of their Subjects, of
whom they are to give an account at the day of Judgment, to admit the
same.

When it is said, the Pope hath not (in the Territories of other States)
the Supreme Civill Power Directly; we are to understand, he doth
not challenge it, as other Civill Soveraigns doe, from the originall
submission thereto of those that are to be governed. For it is evident,
and has already been sufficiently in this Treatise demonstrated, that
the Right of all Soveraigns, is derived originally from the consent of
every one of those that are to bee governed; whether they that choose
him, doe it for their common defence against an Enemy, as when they
agree amongst themselves to appoint a Man, or an Assembly of men to
protect them; or whether they doe it, to save their lives, by submission
to a conquering Enemy. The Pope therefore, when he disclaimeth the
Supreme Civill Power over other States Directly, denyeth no more, but
that his Right cometh to him by that way; He ceaseth not for all that,
to claime it another way; and that is, (without the consent of them
that are to be governed) by a Right given him by God, (which hee calleth
Indirectly,) in his Assumption to the Papacy. But by what way soever he
pretend, the Power is the same; and he may (if it bee granted to be his
Right) depose Princes and States, as often as it is for the Salvation
of Soules, that is, as often as he will; for he claimeth also the Sole
Power to Judge, whether it be to the salvation of mens Souls, or not.
And this is the Doctrine, not onely that Bellarmine here, and many other
Doctors teach in their Sermons and Books, but also that some
Councells have decreed, and the Popes have decreed, and the Popes have
accordingly, when the occasion hath served them, put in practise. For
the fourth Councell of Lateran held under Pope Innocent the third, (in
the third Chap. De Haereticis,) hath this Canon. "If a King at the
Popes admonition, doe not purge his Kingdome of Haeretiques, and being
Excommunicate for the same, make not satisfaction within a year, his
subjects are absolved of their Obedience." And the practise hereof hath
been seen on divers occasions; as in the Deposing of Chilperique, King
of France; in the Translation of the Roman Empire to Charlemaine; in
the Oppression of John King of England; in Transferring the Kingdome
of Navarre; and of late years, in the League against Henry the third of
France, and in many more occurrences. I think there be few Princes that
consider not this as Injust, and Inconvenient; but I wish they would
all resolve to be Kings, or Subjects. Men cannot serve two Masters: They
ought therefore to ease them, either by holding the Reins of Government
wholly in their own hands; or by wholly delivering them into the
hands of the Pope; that such men as are willing to be obedient, may be
protected in their obedience. For this distinction of Temporall, and
Spirituall Power is but words. Power is as really divided, and as
dangerously to all purposes, by sharing with another Indirect Power, as
with a Direct one. But to come now to his Arguments.

The first is this, "The Civill Power is subject to the Spirituall:
Therefore he that hath the Supreme Power Spirituall, hath right to
command Temporall Princes, and dispose of their Temporalls in order to
the Spirituall. As for the distinction of Temporall, and Spirituall,
let us consider in what sense it may be said intelligibly, that the
Temporall, or Civill Power is subject to the Spirituall. There be but
two ways that those words can be made sense. For when wee say, one Power
is subject to another Power, the meaning either is, that he which hath
the one, is subject to him that hath the other; or that the one Power is
to the other, as the means to the end. For wee cannot understand, that
one Power hath Power over another Power; and that one Power can have
Right or Command over another: For Subjection, Command, Right, and
Power are accidents, not of Powers, but of Persons: One Power may be
subordinate to another, as the art of a Sadler, to the art of a Rider.
If then it be granted, that the Civill Government be ordained as a means
to bring us to a Spirituall felicity; yet it does not follow, that if a
King have the Civill Power, and the Pope the Spirituall, that therefore
the King is bound to obey the Pope, more then every Sadler is bound to
obey every Rider. Therefore as from Subordination of an Art, cannot be
inferred the Subjection of the Professor; so from the Subordination of
a Government, cannot be inferred the Subjection of the Governor. When
therefore he saith, the Civill Power is Subject to the Spirituall, his
meaning is, that the Civill Soveraign, is Subject to the Spirituall
Soveraign. And the Argument stands thus, "The Civil Soveraign, is
subject to the Spirituall; Therefore the Spirituall Prince may
command Temporall Princes." Where the conclusion is the same, with the
Antecedent he should have proved. But to prove it, he alledgeth
first, this reason, "Kings and Popes, Clergy and Laity make but one
Common-wealth; that is to say, but one Church: And in all Bodies the
Members depend one upon another: But things Spirituall depend not
of things Temporall: Therefore, Temporall depend on Spirituall. And
therefore are Subject to them." In which Argumentation there be two
grosse errours: one is, that all Christian Kings, Popes, Clergy, and all
other Christian men, make but one Common-wealth: For it is evident that
France is one Common-wealth, Spain another, and Venice a third, &c. And
these consist of Christians; and therefore also are severall Bodies
of Christians; that is to say, severall Churches: And their severall
Soveraigns Represent them, whereby they are capable of commanding and
obeying, of doing and suffering, as a natural man; which no Generall or
Universall Church is, till it have a Representant; which it hath not on
Earth: for if it had, there is no doubt but that all Christendome were
one Common-wealth, whose Soveraign were that Representant, both in
things Spirituall and Temporall: And the Pope, to make himself this
Representant, wanteth three things that our Saviour hath not given
him, to Command, and to Judge, and to Punish, otherwise than (by
Excommunication) to run from those that will not Learn of him: For
though the Pope were Christs onely Vicar, yet he cannot exercise his
government, till our Saviours second coming: And then also it is not the
Pope, but St. Peter himselfe, with the other Apostles, that are to be
Judges of the world.

The other errour in this his first Argument is, that he sayes, the
Members of every Common-wealth, as of a naturall Body, depend one of
another: It is true, they cohaere together; but they depend onely on the
Soveraign, which is the Soul of the Common-wealth; which failing, the
Common-wealth is dissolved into a Civill war, no one man so much
as cohaering to another, for want of a common Dependance on a known
Soveraign; Just as the Members of the naturall Body dissolve into Earth,
for want of a Soul to hold them together. Therefore there is nothing in
this similitude, from whence to inferre a dependance of the Laity on the
Clergy, or of the Temporall Officers on the Spirituall; but of both on
the Civill Soveraign; which ought indeed to direct his Civill commands
to the Salvation of Souls; but is not therefore subject to any but God
himselfe. And thus you see the laboured fallacy of the first Argument,
to deceive such men as distinguish not between the Subordination of
Actions in the way to the End; and the Subjection of Persons one to
another in the administration of the Means. For to every End, the Means
are determined by Nature, or by God himselfe supernaturally: but the
Power to make men use the Means, is in every nation resigned (by the
Law of Nature, which forbiddeth men to violate their Faith given) to the
Civill Soveraign.

His second Argument is this, "Every Common-wealth, (because it is
supposed to be perfect and sufficient in it self,) may command any
other Common-wealth, not subject to it, and force it to change the
administration of the Government, nay depose the Prince, and set another
in his room, if it cannot otherwise defend it selfe against the injuries
he goes about to doe them: much more may a Spirituall Common-wealth
command a Temporall one to change the administration of their
Government, and may depose Princes, and institute others, when they
cannot otherwise defend the Spirituall Good."

That a Common-wealth, to defend it selfe against injuries, may lawfully
doe all that he hath here said, is very true; and hath already in that
which hath gone before been sufficiently demonstrated. And if it were
also true, that there is now in this world a Spirituall Common-wealth,
distinct from a Civill Common-wealth, then might the Prince thereof,
upon injury done him, or upon want of caution that injury be not done
him in time to come, repaire, and secure himself by Warre; which is in
summe, deposing, killing, or subduing, or doing any act of Hostility.
But by the same reason, it would be no lesse lawfull for a Civill
Soveraign, upon the like injuries done, or feared, to make warre
upon the Spirituall Soveraign; which I beleeve is more than Cardinall
Bellarmine would have inferred from his own proposition.

But Spirituall Common-wealth there is none in this world: for it is the
same thing with the Kingdome of Christ; which he himselfe saith, is not
of this world; but shall be in the next world, at the Resurrection, when
they that have lived justly, and beleeved that he was the Christ, shall
(though they died Naturall bodies) rise Spirituall bodies; and then it
is, that our Saviour shall judge the world, and conquer his Adversaries,
and make a Spirituall Common-wealth. In the mean time, seeing there are
no men on earth, whose bodies are Spirituall; there can be no Spirituall
Common-wealth amongst men that are yet in the flesh; unlesse wee call
Preachers, that have Commission to Teach, and prepare men for
their reception into the Kingdome of Christ at the Resurrection, a
Common-wealth; which I have proved to bee none.

The third Argument is this; "It is not lawfull for Christians to
tolerate an Infidel, or Haereticall King, in case he endeavour to draw
them to his Haeresie, or Infidelity. But to judge whether a King draw
his subjects to Haeresie, or not, belongeth to the Pope. Therefore hath
the Pope Right, to determine whether the Prince be to be deposed, or not
deposed."

To this I answer, that both these assertions are false. For Christians,
(or men of what Religion soever,) if they tolerate not their King,
whatsoever law hee maketh, though it bee concerning Religion, doe
violate their faith, contrary to the Divine Law, both Naturall and
Positive: Nor is there any Judge of Haeresie amongst Subjects, but
their own Civill Soveraign; for "Haeresie is nothing else, but a private
opinion, obstinately maintained, contrary to the opinion which the
Publique Person (that is to say, the Representant of the Common-wealth)
hath commanded to bee taught." By which it is manifest, that an
opinion publiquely appointed to bee taught, cannot be Haeresie; nor the
Soveraign Princes that authorize them, Haeretiques. For Haeretiques are
none but private men, that stubbornly defend some Doctrine, prohibited
by their lawful Soveraigns.

But to prove that Christians are not to tolerate Infidell, or
Haereticall Kings, he alledgeth a place in Deut. 17. where God
forbiddeth the Jews, when they shall set a King over themselves, to
choose a stranger; And from thence inferreth, that it is unlawfull for
a Christian, to choose a King, that is not a Christian. And ’tis true,
that he that is a Christian, that is, hee that hath already obliged
himself to receive our Saviour when he shall come, for his King, shal
tempt God too much in choosing for King in this world, one that hee
knoweth will endeavour, both by terrour, and perswasion to make him
violate his faith. But, it is (saith hee) the same danger, to choose one
that is not a Christian, for King, and not to depose him, when hee
is chosen. To this I say, the question is not of the danger of not
deposing; but of the Justice of deposing him. To choose him, may in some
cases bee unjust; but to depose him, when he is chosen, is in no case
Just. For it is alwaies violation of faith, and consequently against the
Law of Nature, which is the eternal Law of God. Nor doe wee read, that
any such Doctrine was accounted Christian in the time of the Apostles;
nor in the time of the Romane Emperours, till the Popes had the Civill
Soveraignty of Rome. But to this he hath replyed, that the Christians of
old, deposed not Nero, nor Diocletian, nor Julian, nor Valens an Arrian,
for this cause onely, that they wanted Temporall forces. Perhaps so. But
did our Saviour, who for calling for, might have had twelve Legions
of immortall, invulnerable Angels to assist him, want forces to depose
Caesar, or at least Pilate, that unjustly, without finding fault in him,
delivered him to the Jews to bee crucified? Or if the Apostles wanted
Temporall forces to depose Nero, was it therefore necessary for them in
their Epistles to the new made Christians, to teach them, (as they did)
to obey the Powers constituted over them, (whereof Nero in that time was
one,) and that they ought to obey them, not for fear of their wrath,
but for conscience sake? Shall we say they did not onely obey, but also
teach what they meant not, for want of strength? It is not therefore
for want of strength, but for conscience sake, that Christians are to
tolerate their Heathen Princes, or Princes (for I cannot call any one
whose Doctrine is the Publique Doctrine, an Haeretique) that authorize
the teaching of an Errour. And whereas for the Temporall Power of the
Pope, he alledgeth further, that St. Paul (1 Cor. 6.) appointed Judges
under the Heathen Princes of those times, such as were not ordained by
those Princes; it is not true. For St. Paul does but advise them,
to take some of their Brethren to compound their differences, as
Arbitrators, rather than to goe to law one with another before the
Heathen Judges; which is a wholsome Precept, and full of Charity, fit
to bee practised also in the Best Christian Common-wealths. And for
the danger that may arise to Religion, by the Subjects tolerating of an
Heathen, or an Erring Prince, it is a point, of which a Subject is no
competent Judge; or if hee bee, the Popes Temporall Subjects may judge
also of the Popes Doctrine. For every Christian Prince, as I have
formerly proved, is no lesse Supreme Pastor of his own Subjects, than
the Pope of his.

The fourth Argument, is taken from the Baptisme of Kings; wherein, that
they may be made Christians they submit their Scepters to Christ; and
promise to keep, and defend the Christian Faith. This is true; for
Christian Kings are no more but Christs Subjects: but they may, for all
that, bee the Popes Fellowes; for they are Supreme Pastors of their own
Subjects; and the Pope is no more but King, and Pastor, even in Rome it
selfe.

The fifth Argument, is drawn from the words spoken by our Saviour, Feed
My Sheep; by which was give all Power necessary for a Pastor; as the
Power to chase away Wolves, such as are Haeretiques; the Power to shut
up Rammes, if they be mad, or push at the other Sheep with their Hornes,
such as are Evill (though Christian) Kings; and Power to give the Flock
convenient food: From whence hee inferreth, that St. Peter had these
three Powers given him by Christ. To which I answer, that the last of
these Powers, is no more than the Power, or rather Command to Teach.
For the first, which is to chase away Wolves, that is, Haeretiques, the
place hee quoteth is (Matth. 7.15.) "Beware of false Prophets which
come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves."
But neither are Haeretiques false Prophets, or at all Prophets: nor
(admitting Haeretiques for the Wolves there meant,) were the Apostles
commanded to kill them, or if they were Kings, to depose them; but to
beware of, fly, and avoid them: nor was it to St. Peter, nor to any of
the Apostles, but to the multitude of the Jews that followed him into
the mountain, men for the most part not yet converted, that hee gave
this Counsell, to Beware of false Prophets: which therefore if it
conferre a Power of chasing away Kings, was given, not onely to private
men; but to men that were not at all Christians. And as to the Power
of Separating, and Shutting up of furious Rammes, (by which hee meaneth
Christian Kings that refuse to submit themselves to the Roman Pastor,)
our Saviour refused to take upon him that Power in this world himself,
but advised to let the Corn and Tares grow up together till the day of
Judgment: much lesse did hee give it to St. Peter, or can S. Peter give
it to the Popes. St. Peter, and all other Pastors, are bidden to esteem
those Christians that disobey the Church, that is, (that disobey the
Christian Soveraigne) as Heathen men, and as Publicans. Seeing then men
challenge to the Pope no authority over Heathen Princes, they ought to
challenge none over those that are to bee esteemed as Heathen.

But from the Power to Teach onely, hee inferreth also a Coercive Power
in the Pope, over Kings. The Pastor (saith he) must give his flock
convenient food: Therefore the Pope may, and ought to compell Kings to
doe their duty. Out of which it followeth, that the Pope, as Pastor of
Christian men, is King of Kings: which all Christian Kings ought indeed
either to Confesse, or else they ought to take upon themselves the
Supreme Pastorall Charge, every one in his own Dominion.

His sixth, and last Argument, is from Examples. To which I answer,
first, that Examples prove nothing; Secondly, that the Examples he
alledgeth make not so much as a probability of Right. The fact of
Jehoiada, in Killing Athaliah (2 Kings 11.) was either by the Authority
of King Joash, or it was a horrible Crime in the High Priest, which
(ever after the election of King Saul) was a mere Subject. The fact of
St. Ambrose, in Excommunicating Theodosius the Emperour, (if it were
true hee did so,) was a Capitall Crime. And for the Popes, Gregory 1.
Greg. 2. Zachary, and Leo 3. their Judgments are void, as given in their
own Cause; and the Acts done by them conformably to this Doctrine, are
the greatest Crimes (especially that of Zachary) that are incident to
Humane Nature. And thus much of Power Ecclesiasticall; wherein I had
been more briefe, forbearing to examine these Arguments of Bellarmine,
if they had been his, as a Private man, and not as the Champion of the
Papacy, against all other Christian Princes, and States.



CHAPTER XLIII. OF WHAT IS NECESSARY FOR A MANS RECEPTION INTO THE
KINGDOME OF HEAVEN.




The Difficulty Of Obeying God And Man Both At Once

The most frequent praetext of Sedition, and Civill Warre, in Christian
Common-wealths hath a long time proceeded from a difficulty, not yet
sufficiently resolved, of obeying at once, both God, and Man, then
when their Commandements are one contrary to the other. It is manifest
enough, that when a man receiveth two contrary Commands, and knows that
one of them is Gods, he ought to obey that, and not the other, though
it be the command even of his lawfull Soveraign (whether a Monarch, or
a Soveraign Assembly,) or the command of his Father. The difficulty
therefore consisteth in this, that men when they are commanded in the
name of God, know not in divers Cases, whether the command be from God,
or whether he that commandeth, doe but abuse Gods name for some private
ends of his own. For as there ware in the Church of the Jews, many false
Prophets, that sought reputation with the people, by feigned Dreams, and
Visions; so there have been in all times in the Church of Christ, false
Teachers, that seek reputation with the people, by phantasticall and
false Doctrines; and by such reputation (as is the nature of Ambition,)
to govern them for their private benefit.




Is None To Them That Distinguish Between What Is, And What Is Not
Necessary To Salvation

But this difficulty of obeying both God, and the Civill Soveraign on
earth, to those that can distinguish between what is Necessary, and what
is not Necessary for their Reception into the Kingdome of God, is of no
moment. For if the command of the Civill Soveraign bee such, as that it
may be obeyed, without the forfeiture of life Eternall; not to obey it
is unjust; and the precept of the Apostle takes place; "Servants obey
your Masters in all things;" and, "Children obey your Parents in all
things;" and the precept of our Saviour, "The Scribes and Pharisees sit
in Moses Chaire, All therefore they shall say, that observe, and doe."
But if the command be such, as cannot be obeyed, without being damned
to Eternall Death, then it were madnesse to obey it, and the Counsell
of our Saviour takes place, (Mat. 10. 28.) "Fear not those that kill the
body, but cannot kill the soule." All men therefore that would avoid,
both the punishments that are to be in this world inflicted, for
disobedience to their earthly Soveraign, and those that shall be
inflicted in the world to come for disobedience to God, have need be
taught to distinguish well between what is, and what is not Necessary to
Eternall Salvation.




All That Is Necessary To Salvation Is Contained In Faith And Obedience

All that is NECESSARY to Salvation, is contained in two Vertues, Faith
in Christ, and Obedience to Laws. The latter of these, if it were
perfect, were enough to us. But because wee are all guilty of
disobedience to Gods Law, not onely originally in Adam, but also
actually by our own transgressions, there is required at our hands now,
not onely Obedience for the rest of our time, but also a Remission of
sins for the time past; which Remission is the reward of our Faith
in Christ. That nothing else is Necessarily required to Salvation, is
manifest from this, that the Kingdome of Heaven, is shut to none but
to Sinners; that is to say, to the disobedient, or transgressors of the
Law; nor to them, in case they Repent, and Beleeve all the Articles of
Christian Faith, Necessary to Salvation.




What Obedience Is Necessary;

The Obedience required at our hands by God, that accepteth in all our
actions the Will for the Deed, is a serious Endeavour to Obey him;
and is called also by all such names as signifie that Endeavour. And
therefore Obedience, is sometimes called by the names of Charity, and
Love, because they imply a Will to Obey; and our Saviour himself maketh
our Love to God, and to one another, a Fulfilling of the whole Law: and
sometimes by the name of Righteousnesse; for Righteousnesse is but the
will to give to every one his owne, that is to say, the will to obey
the Laws: and sometimes by the name of Repentance; because to Repent,
implyeth a turning away from sinne, which is the same, with the return
of the will to Obedience. Whosoever therefore unfeignedly desireth
to fulfill the Commandements of God, or repenteth him truely of his
transgressions, or that loveth God with all his heart, and his neighbor
as himself, hath all the Obedience Necessary to his Reception into the
Kingdome of God: For if God should require perfect Innocence, there
could no flesh be saved.




And To What Laws

But what Commandements are those that God hath given us? Are all
those Laws which were given to the Jews by the hand of Moses, the
Commandements of God? If they bee, why are not Christians taught to obey
them? If they be not, what others are so, besides the Law of Nature? For
our Saviour Christ hath not given us new Laws, but Counsell to observe
those wee are subject to; that is to say, the Laws of Nature, and the
Laws of our severall Soveraigns: Nor did he make any new Law to the Jews
in his Sermon on the Mount, but onely expounded the Laws of Moses, to
which they were subject before. The Laws of God therefore are none
but the Laws of Nature, whereof the principall is, that we should
not violate our Faith, that is, a commandement to obey our Civill
Soveraigns, which wee constituted over us, by mutuall pact one with
another. And this Law of God, that commandeth Obedience to the Law
Civill, commandeth by consequence Obedience to all the Precepts of the
Bible, which (as I have proved in the precedent Chapter) is there onely
Law, where the Civill Soveraign hath made it so; and in other places but
Counsell; which a man at his own perill, may without injustice refuse to
obey.




In The Faith Of A Christian, Who Is The Person Beleeved

Knowing now what is the Obedience Necessary to Salvation, and to whom
it is due; we are to consider next concerning Faith, whom, and why we
beleeve; and what are the Articles, or Points necessarily to be beleeved
by them that shall be saved. And first, for the Person whom we beleeve,
because it is impossible to beleeve any Person, before we know what he
saith, it is necessary he be one that wee have heard speak. The Person
therefore, whom Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses and the Prophets beleeved,
was God himself, that spake unto them supernaturally: And the Person,
whom the Apostles and Disciples that conversed with Christ beleeved, was
our Saviour himself. But of them, to whom neither God the Father, nor
our Saviour ever spake, it cannot be said, that the Person whom they
beleeved, was God. They beleeved the Apostles, and after them the
Pastors and Doctors of the Church, that recommended to their faith the
History of the Old and New Testament: so that the Faith of Christians
ever since our Saviours time, hath had for foundation, first, the
reputation of their Pastors, and afterward, the authority of those that
made the Old and New Testament to be received for the Rule of Faith;
which none could do but Christian Soveraignes; who are therefore the
Supreme Pastors, and the onely Persons, whom Christians now hear speak
from God; except such as God speaketh to, in these days supernaturally.
But because there be many false Prophets "gone out into the world,"
other men are to examine such Spirits (as St. John advised us, 1
Epistle, Chap. 4. ver.1.) "whether they be of God, or not." And
therefore, seeing the Examination of Doctrines belongeth to the Supreme
Pastor, the Person which all they that have no speciall revelation are
to beleeve, is (in every Common-wealth) the Supreme Pastor, that is to
say, the Civill Soveraigne.




The Causes Of Christian Faith

The causes why men beleeve any Christian Doctrine, are various; For
Faith is the gift of God; and he worketh it in each severall man, by
such wayes, as it seemeth good unto himself. The most ordinary immediate
cause of our beleef, concerning any point of Christian Faith, is, that
wee beleeve the Bible to be the Word of God. But why wee beleeve the
Bible to be the Word of God, is much disputed, as all questions must
needs bee, that are not well stated. For they make not the question
to be, "Why we Beleeve it," but "How wee Know it;" as if Beleeving and
Knowing were all one. And thence while one side ground their Knowledge
upon the Infallibility of the Church, and the other side, on the
Testimony of the Private Spirit, neither side concludeth what it
pretends. For how shall a man know the Infallibility of the Church, but
by knowing first the Infallibility of the Scripture? Or how shall a man
know his own Private spirit to be other than a beleef, grounded upon the
Authority, and Arguments of his Teachers; or upon a Presumption of his
own Gifts? Besides, there is nothing in the Scripture, from which can be
inferred the Infallibility of the Church; much lesse, of any particular
Church; and least of all, the Infallibility of any particular man.




Faith Comes By Hearing

It is manifest, therefore, that Christian men doe not know, but onely
beleeve the Scripture to be the Word of God; and that the means of
making them beleeve which God is pleased to afford men ordinarily, is
according to the way of Nature, that is to say, from their Teachers.
It is the Doctrine of St. Paul concerning Christian Faith in generall,
(Rom. 10.17.) "Faith cometh by Hearing," that is, by Hearing our lawfull
Pastors. He saith also (ver. 14,15. of the same Chapter) "How shall
they beleeve in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher? and how shall they Preach, except they be sent?"
Whereby it is evident, that the ordinary cause of beleeving that the
Scriptures are the Word of God, is the same with the cause of the
beleeving of all other Articles of our Faith, namely, the Hearing of
those that are by the Law allowed and appointed to Teach us, as our
Parents in their Houses, and our Pastors in the Churches: Which also
is made more manifest by experience. For what other cause can there bee
assigned, why in Christian Common-wealths all men either beleeve, or
at least professe the Scripture to bee the Word of God, and in other
Common-wealths scarce any; but that in Christian Common-wealths they
are taught it from their infancy; and in other places they are taught
otherwise?

But if Teaching be the cause of Faith, why doe not all beleeve? It is
certain therefore that Faith is the gift of God, and hee giveth it to
whom he will. Neverthelesse, because of them to whom he giveth it, he
giveth it by the means of Teachers, the immediate cause of Faith is
Hearing. In a School where many are taught, and some profit, others
profit not, the cause of learning in them that profit, is the Master;
yet it cannot be thence inferred, that learning is not the gift of God.
All good things proceed from God; yet cannot all that have them, say
they are Inspired; for that implies a gift supernaturall, and the
immediate hand of God; which he that pretends to, pretends to be a
Prophet, and is subject to the examination of the Church.

But whether men Know, or Beleeve, or Grant the Scriptures to be the Word
of God; if out of such places of them, as are without obscurity, I
shall shew what Articles of Faith are necessary, and onely necessary for
Salvation, those men must needs Know, Beleeve, or Grant the same.

The Onely Necessary Article Of Christian Faith, The (Unum Necessarium)
Onely Article of Faith, which the Scripture maketh simply Necessary to
Salvation, is this, that JESUS IS THE CHRIST. By the name of Christ, is
understood the King, which God had before promised by the Prophets of
the Old Testament, to send into the world, to reign (over the Jews,
and over such of other nations as should beleeve in him) under himself
eternally; and to give them that eternall life, which was lost by the
sin of Adam. Which when I have proved out of Scripture, I will further
shew when, and in what sense some other Articles may bee also called
Necessary.




Proved From The Scope Of The Evangelists

For Proof that the Beleef of this Article, Jesus Is The Christ, is all
the Faith required to Salvation, my first Argument shall bee from the
Scope of the Evangelists; which was by the description of the life of
our Saviour, to establish that one Article, Jesus Is The Christ. The
summe of St. Matthews Gospell is this, That Jesus was of the stock of
David; Born of a Virgin; which are the Marks of the true Christ: That
the Magi came to worship him as King of the Jews: That Herod for the
same cause sought to kill him: That John Baptist proclaimed him: That
he preached by himselfe, and his Apostles that he was that King; That
he taught the Law, not as a Scribe, but as a man of Authority: That he
cured diseases by his Word onely, and did many other Miracles, which
were foretold the Christ should doe: That he was saluted King when he
entered into Jerusalem: That he fore-warned them to beware of all others
that should pretend to be Christ: That he was taken, accused, and put
to death, for saying, hee was King: That the cause of his condemnation
written on the Crosse, was JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWES.
All which tend to no other end than this, that men should beleeve,
that Jesus Is The Christ. Such therefore was the Scope of St. Matthews
Gospel. But the Scope of all the Evangelists (as may appear by reading
them) was the same. Therefore the Scope of the whole Gospell, was the
establishing of that onely Article. And St. John expressely makes it his
conclusion, John 20. 31. "These things are written, that you may know
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God."




From The Sermons Of The Apostles:

My second Argument is taken from the Subject of the Sermons of the
Apostles, both whilest our Saviour lived on earth, and after his
Ascension. The Apostles in our Saviours time were sent, Luke 9.2. to
Preach the Kingdome of God: For neither there, nor Mat. 10.7. giveth he
any Commission to them, other than this, "As ye go, Preach, saying, the
Kingdome of Heaven is at hand;" that is, that Jesus is the Messiah, the
Christ, the King which was to come. That their Preaching also after his
ascension was the same, is manifest out of Acts 17.6. "They drew (saith
St. Luke) Jason and certain Brethren unto the Rulers of the City,
crying, These that have turned the world upside down are come hither
also, whom Jason hath received. And these all do contrary to the Decrees
of Caesar, saying, that there is another King, one Jesus:" And out of
the 2.&3. verses of the same Chapter, where it is said, that St. Paul
"as his manner was, went in unto them; and three Sabbath dayes reasoned
with them out of the Scriptures; opening and alledging, that Christ must
needs have suffered, and risen againe from the dead, and that this Jesus
(whom he preached) is Christ."




From The Easinesse Of The Doctrine:

The third Argument is, from those places of Scripture, by which all the
Faith required to Salvation is declared to be Easie. For if an inward
assent of the mind to all the Doctrines concerning Christian Faith now
taught, (whereof the greatest part are disputed,) were necessary to
Salvation, there would be nothing in the world so hard, as to be a
Christian. The Thief upon the Crosse though repenting, could not have
been saved for saying, "Lord remember me when thou commest into thy
Kingdome;" by which he testified no beleefe of any other Article, but
this, That Jesus Was The King. Nor could it bee said (as it is Mat.
11. 30.) that "Christs yoke is Easy, and his burthen Light:" Nor that
"Little Children beleeve in him," as it is Matth. 18.6. Nor could St.
Paul have said (1 Cor. 1. 21.) "It pleased God by the Foolishnesse of
preaching, to save them that beleeve:" Nor could St. Paul himself have
been saved, much lesse have been so great a Doctor of the Church
so suddenly, that never perhaps thought of Transsubstantiation, nor
Purgatory, nor many other Articles now obtruded.




From Formall And Cleer Texts

The fourth Argument is taken from places expresse, and such as receive
no controversie of Interpretation; as first, John 5. 39. "Search the
Scriptures, for in them yee thinke yee have eternall life; and they are
they that testifie of mee." Our Saviour here speaketh of the Scriptures
onely of the Old Testament; for the Jews at that time could not search
the Scriptures of the New Testament, which were not written. But the Old
Testament hath nothing of Christ, but the Markes by which men might
know him when hee came; as that he should descend from David, be born at
Bethlehem, and of a Virgin; doe great Miracles, and the like. Therefore
to beleeve that this Jesus was He, was sufficient to eternall life: but
more than sufficient is not Necessary; and consequently no other Article
is required. Again, (John 11. 26.) "Whosoever liveth and beleeveth in
mee, shall not die eternally," Therefore to beleeve in Christ, is faith
sufficient to eternall life; and consequently no more faith than that
is Necessary, But to beleeve in Jesus, and to beleeve that Jesus is the
Christ, is all one, as appeareth in the verses immediately following.
For when our Saviour (verse 26.) had said to Martha, "Beleevest thou
this?" she answereth (verse 27.) "Yea Lord, I beleeve that thou art the
Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world;" Therefore
this Article alone is faith sufficient to life eternall; and more than
sufficient is not Necessary. Thirdly, John 20. 31. "These things are
written that yee might beleeve, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God, and that beleeving yee might have life through his name." There, to
beleeve that Jesus Is The Christ, is faith sufficient to the obtaining
of life; and therefore no other Article is Necessary. Fourthly, 1 John
4. 2. "Every Spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is of God." And 1 Joh. 5. 1. "whosoever beleeveth that Jesus is
the Christ, is born of God." And verse 5. "Who is hee that overcommeth
the world, but he that beleeveth that Jesus is the Son of God?" Fiftly,
Act. 8. ver. 36, 37. "See (saith the Eunuch) here is water, what doth
hinder me to be baptized? And Philip said, If thou beleevest with all
thy heart thou mayst. And hee answered and said, I beleeve that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God." Therefore this Article beleeved, Jesus Is The
Christ, is sufficient to Baptisme, that is to say, to our Reception into
the Kingdome of God, and by consequence, onely Necessary. And generally
in all places where our Saviour saith to any man, "Thy faith hath saved
thee," the cause he saith it, is some Confession, which directly, or by
consequence, implyeth a beleef, that Jesus Is The Christ.




From That It Is The Foundation Of All Other Articles

The last Argument is from the places, where this Article is made the
Foundation of Faith: For he that holdeth the Foundation shall bee saved.
Which places are first, Mat. 24.23. "If any man shall say unto you, Loe,
here is Christ, or there, beleeve it not, for there shall arise false
Christs, and false Prophets, and shall shew great signes and wonders,
&c." Here wee see, this Article Jesus Is The Christ, must bee held,
though hee that shall teach the contrary should doe great miracles. The
second place is Gal. 1. 8. "Though we, or an Angell from Heaven preach
any other Gospell unto you, than that wee have preached unto you, let
him bee accursed." But the Gospell which Paul, and the other Apostles,
preached, was onely this Article, that Jesus Is The Christ; Therefore
for the Beleef of this Article, we are to reject the Authority of
an Angell from heaven; much more of any mortall man, if he teach the
contrary. This is therefore the Fundamentall Article of Christian Faith.
A third place is, 1 Joh. 4.1. "Beloved, beleeve not every spirit. Hereby
yee shall know the Spirit of God; every spirit that confesseth that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God." By which it is evident,
that this Article, is the measure, and rule, by which to estimate,
and examine all other Articles; and is therefore onely Fundamentall.
A fourth is, Matt. 16.18. where after St. Peter had professed this
Article, saying to our Saviour, "Thou art Christ the Son of the living
God," Our Saviour answered, "Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church:" from whence I inferre, that this Article is that,
on which all other Doctrines of the Church are built, as on their
Foundation. A fift is (1 Cor. 3. ver. 11, 12, &c.) "Other Foundation can
no man lay, than that which is laid, Jesus is the Christ. Now if any man
build upon this Foundation, Gold, Silver, pretious Stones, Wood, Hay,
Stubble; Every mans work shall be made manifest; For the Day shall
declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try
every mans work, of what sort it is. If any mans work abide, which he
hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward: If any mans work shall
bee burnt, he shall suffer losse; but he himself shall be saved, yet so
as by fire." Which words, being partly plain and easie to understand,
and partly allegoricall and difficult; out of that which is plain, may
be inferred, that Pastors that teach this Foundation, that Jesus Is The
Christ, though they draw from it false consequences, (which all men are
sometimes subject to,) they may neverthelesse bee saved; much more that
they may bee saved, who being no Pastors, but Hearers, beleeve that
which is by their lawfull Pastors taught them. Therefore the beleef of
this Article is sufficient; and by consequence there is no other Article
of Faith Necessarily required to Salvation.

Now for the part which is Allegoricall, as "That the fire shall try
every mans work," and that "They shall be saved, but so as by fire,"
or "through fire," (for the originall is dia puros,) it maketh nothing
against this conclusion which I have drawn from the other words, that
are plain. Neverthelesse, because upon this place there hath been an
argument taken, to prove the fire of Purgatory, I will also here offer
you my conjecture concerning the meaning of this triall of Doctrines,
and saving of men as by Fire. The Apostle here seemeth to allude to
the words of the Prophet Zachary, Ch. 13. 8,9. who speaking of the
Restauration of the Kingdome of God, saith thus, "Two parts therein
shall be cut off, and die, but the third shall be left therein; and
I will bring the third part through the Fire, and will refine them as
Silver is refined, and will try them as Gold is tryed; they shall call
on the name of the Lord, and I will hear them." The day of Judgment, is
the day of the Restauration of the Kingdome of God; and at that day
it is, that St. Peter tells us (2 Pet. 3. v.7, 10, 12.) shall be the
Conflagration of the world, wherein the wicked shall perish; but the
remnant which God will save, shall passe through that Fire, unhurt,
and be therein (as Silver and Gold are refined by the fire from their
drosse) tryed, and refined from their Idolatry, and be made to call upon
the name of the true God. Alluding whereto St. Paul here saith, that The
Day (that is, the Day of Judgment, the Great Day of our Saviours comming
to restore the Kingdome of God in Israel) shall try every mans doctrine,
by Judging, which are Gold, Silver, Pretious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble;
And then they that have built false Consequences on the true Foundation,
shall see their Doctrines condemned; neverthelesse they themselves
shall be saved, and passe unhurt through this universall Fire, and live
eternally, to call upon the name of the true and onely God. In which
sense there is nothing that accordeth not with the rest of Holy
Scripture, or any glimpse of the fire of Purgatory.




In What Sense Other Articles May Be Called Necessary

But a man may here aske, whether it bee not as necessary to Salvation,
to beleeve, that God is Omnipotent; Creator of the world; that Jesus
Christ is risen; and that all men else shall rise again from the dead
at the last day; as to beleeve, that Jesus Is The Christ. To which I
answer, they are; and so are many more Articles: but they are such, as
are contained in this one, and may be deduced from it, with more, or
lesse difficulty. For who is there that does not see, that they
who beleeve Jesus to be the Son of the God of Israel, and that the
Israelites had for God the Omnipotent Creator of all things, doe therein
also beleeve, that God is the Omnipotent Creator of all things? Or how
can a man beleeve, that Jesus is the King that shall reign eternally,
unlesse hee beleeve him also risen again from the dead? For a dead man
cannot exercise the Office of a King. In summe, he that holdeth this
Foundation, Jesus Is The Christ, holdeth Expressely all that hee
seeth rightly deduced from it, and Implicitely all that is consequent
thereunto, though he have not skill enough to discern the consequence.
And therefore it holdeth still good, that the beleef of this one Article
is sufficient faith to obtaine remission of sinnes to the Penitent, and
consequently to bring them into the Kingdome of Heaven.




That Faith, And Obedience Are Both Of Them Necessary To Salvation

Now that I have shewn, that all the Obedience required to Salvation,
consisteth in the will to obey the Law of God, that is to say, in
Repentance; and all the Faith required to the same, is comprehended in
the beleef of this Article, Jesus Is The Christ; I will further alledge
those places of the Gospell, that prove, that all that is Necessary to
Salvation is contained in both these joined together. The men to whom
St. Peter preached on the day of Pentecost, next after the Ascension
of our Saviour, asked him, and the rest of the Apostles, saying, (Act.
2.37.) "Men and Brethren what shall we doe?" to whom St. Peter answered
(in the next verse) "Repent, and be Baptized every one of you, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost."
Therefore Repentance, and Baptisme, that is, beleeving that Jesus Is The
Christ, is all that is Necessary to Salvation. Again, our Saviour being
asked by a certain Ruler, (Luke 18.18.) "What shall I doe to inherit
eternall life?" Answered (verse 20) "Thou knowest the Commandements,
Doe not commit Adultery, Doe not Kill, Doe not Steal, Doe not bear false
witnesse, Honor thy Father, and thy Mother;" which when he said he had
observed, our Saviour added, "Sell all thou hast, give it to the Poor,
and come and follow me:" which was as much as to say, Relye on me that
am the King: Therefore to fulfill the Law, and to beleeve that Jesus
is the King, is all that is required to bring a man to eternall life.
Thirdly, St. Paul saith (Rom. 1.17.) "The Just shall live by Faith;" not
every one, but the Just; therefore Faith and Justice (that is, the Will
To Be Just, or Repentance) are all that is Necessary to life eternall.
And (Mark 1.15.) our Saviour preached, saying, "The time is fulfilled,
and the Kingdom of God is at hand, Repent and Beleeve the Evangile,"
that is, the Good news that the Christ was come. Therefore to Repent,
and to Beleeve that Jesus is the Christ, is all that is required to
Salvation.




What Each Of Them Contributes Thereunto

Seeing then it is Necessary that Faith, and Obedience (implyed in the
word Repentance) do both concurre to our Salvation; the question
by which of the two we are Justified, is impertinently disputed.
Neverthelesse, it will not be impertinent, to make manifest in what
manner each of them contributes thereunto; and in what sense it is said,
that we are to be Justified by the one, and by the other. And first,
if by Righteousnesse be understood the Justice of the Works themselves,
there is no man that can be saved; for there is none that hath not
transgressed the Law of God. And therefore when wee are said to be
Justified by Works, it is to be understood of the Will, which God doth
alwaies accept for the Work it selfe, as well in good, as in evill men.
And in this sense onely it is, that a man is called Just, or Unjust; and
that his Justice Justifies him, that is, gives him the title, in Gods
acceptation, of Just; and renders him capable of Living By His Faith,
which before he was not. So that Justice Justifies in that that sense,
in which to Justifie, is the same that to Denominate A Man Just; and not
in the signification of discharging the Law; whereby the punishment of
his sins should be unjust.

But a man is then also said to be Justified, when his Plea, though in
it selfe unsufficient, is accepted; as when we Plead our Will, our
Endeavour to fulfill the Law, and Repent us of our failings, and God
accepteth it for the Performance it selfe: And because God accepteth not
the Will for the Deed, but onely in the Faithfull; it is therefore Faith
that makes good our Plea; and in this sense it is, that Faith onely
Justifies: So that Faith and Obedience are both Necessary to Salvation;
yet in severall senses each of them is said to Justifie.




Obedience To God And To The Civill Soveraign Not Inconsistent

Whether Christian, Having thus shewn what is Necessary to Salvation; it
is not hard to reconcile our Obedience to the Civill Soveraign; who is
either Christian, or Infidel. If he bee a Christian, he alloweth the
beleefe of this Article, that Jesus Is The Christ; and of all the
Articles that are contained in, or are evident consequence deduced from
it: which is all the Faith Necessary to Salvation. And because he is a
Soveraign, he requireth Obedience to all his owne, that is, to all the
Civill Laws; in which also are contained all the Laws of Nature, that
is, all the Laws of God: for besides the Laws of Nature, and the Laws of
the Church, which are part of the Civill Law, (for the Church that
can make Laws is the Common-wealth,) there bee no other Laws Divine.
Whosoever therefore obeyeth his Christian Soveraign, is not thereby
hindred, neither from beleeving, nor from obeying God. But suppose that
a Christian King should from this Foundation, Jesus Is The Christ, draw
some false consequences, that is to say, make some superstructions of
Hay, or Stubble, and command the teaching of the same; yet seeing St.
Paul says, he shal be saved; much more shall he be saved, that teacheth
them by his command; and much more yet, he that teaches not, but onely
beleeves his lawfull Teacher. And in case a Subject be forbidden by
the Civill Soveraign to professe some of those his opinions, upon
what grounds can he disobey? Christian Kings may erre in deducing a
Consequence, but who shall Judge? Shall a private man Judge, when the
question is of his own obedience? or shall any man Judg but he that is
appointed thereto by the Church, that is, by the Civill Soveraign that
representeth it? or if the Pope, or an Apostle Judge, may he not erre
in deducing of a consequence? did not one of the two, St. Peter, or St.
Paul erre in a superstructure, when St. Paul withstood St. Peter to his
face? There can therefore be no contradiction between the Laws of God,
and the Laws of a Christian Common-wealth.




Or Infidel

And when the Civill Soveraign is an Infidel, every one of his own
Subjects that resisteth him, sinneth against the Laws of God (for such
as are the Laws of Nature,) and rejecteth the counsell of the Apostles,
that admonisheth all Christians to obey their Princes, and all Children
and Servants to obey they Parents, and Masters, in all things. And for
their Faith, it is internall, and invisible; They have the licence that
Naaman had, and need not put themselves into danger for it. But if they
do, they ought to expect their reward in Heaven, and not complain of
their Lawfull Soveraign; much lesse make warre upon him. For he that
is not glad of any just occasion of Martyrdome, has not the faith be
professeth, but pretends it onely, to set some colour upon his own
contumacy. But what Infidel King is so unreasonable, as knowing he has
a Subject, that waiteth for the second comming of Christ, after the
present world shall be burnt, and intendeth then to obey him (which is
the intent of beleeving that Jesus is the Christ,) and in the mean time
thinketh himself bound to obey the Laws of that Infidel King, (which
all Christians are obliged in conscience to doe,) to put to death, or to
persecute such a Subject?

And thus much shall suffice, concerning the Kingdome of God, and Policy
Ecclesiasticall. Wherein I pretend not to advance any Position of
my own, but onely to shew what are the Consequences that seem to me
deducible from the Principles of Christian Politiques, (which are the
holy Scriptures,) in confirmation of the Power of Civill Soveraigns, and
the Duty of their Subjects. And in the allegation of Scripture, I have
endeavoured to avoid such Texts as are of obscure, or controverted
Interpretation; and to alledge none, but is such sense as is most plain,
and agreeable to the harmony and scope of the whole Bible; which was
written for the re-establishment of the Kingdome of God in Christ. For
it is not the bare Words, but the Scope of the writer that giveth the
true light, by which any writing is to bee interpreted; and they that
insist upon single Texts, without considering the main Designe, can
derive no thing from them cleerly; but rather by casting atomes of
Scripture, as dust before mens eyes, make every thing more obscure than
it is; an ordinary artifice of those that seek not the truth, but their
own advantage.




PART IV.
OF THE KINGDOME OF DARKNESSE




CHAPTER XLIV. OF SPIRITUALL DARKNESSE FROM MISINTERPRETATION OF
SCRIPTURE




The Kingdome Of Darknesse What

Besides these Soveraign Powers, Divine, and Humane, of which I have
hitherto discoursed, there is mention in Scripture of another Power,
namely, (Eph. 6. 12.), that of "the Rulers of the Darknesse of this
world," (Mat. 12. 26.), "the Kingdome of Satan," and, (Mat. 9. 34.), "the
Principality of Beelzebub over Daemons," that is to say, over Phantasmes
that appear in the Air: For which cause Satan is also called (Eph. 2.
2.) "the Prince of the Power of the Air;" and (because he ruleth in the
darknesse of this world) (Joh. 16. 11.) "The Prince of this world;" And
in consequence hereunto, they who are under his Dominion, in opposition
to the faithfull (who are the Children Of The Light) are called the
Children Of Darknesse. For seeing Beelzebub is Prince of Phantasmes,
Inhabitants of his Dominion of Air and Darknesse, the Children of
Darknesse, and these Daemons, Phantasmes, or Spirits of Illusion,
signifie allegorically the same thing. This considered, the Kingdome
of Darknesse, as it is set forth in these, and other places of the
Scripture, is nothing else but a "Confederacy of Deceivers, that to
obtain dominion over men in this present world, endeavour by dark, and
erroneous Doctrines, to extinguish in them the Light, both of Nature,
and of the Gospell; and so to dis-prepare them for the Kingdome of God
to come."




The Church Not Yet Fully Freed Of Darknesse

As men that are utterly deprived from their Nativity, of the light
of the bodily Eye, have no Idea at all, of any such light; and no man
conceives in his imagination any greater light, than he hath at some
time, or other perceived by his outward Senses: so also is it of the
light of the Gospel, and of the light of the Understanding, that no man
can conceive there is any greater degree of it, than that which he hath
already attained unto. And from hence it comes to passe, that men
have no other means to acknowledge their owne Darknesse, but onely by
reasoning from the un-forseen mischances, that befall them in their
ways; The Darkest part of the Kingdome of Satan, is that which is
without the Church of God; that is to say, amongst them that beleeve not
in Jesus Christ. But we cannot say, that therefore the Church enjoyeth
(as the land of Goshen) all the light, which to the performance of
the work enjoined us by God, is necessary. Whence comes it, that in
Christendome there has been, almost from the time of the Apostles,
such justling of one another out of their places, both by forraign,
and Civill war? such stumbling at every little asperity of their own
fortune, and every little eminence of that of other men? and such
diversity of ways in running to the same mark, Felicity, if it be not
Night amongst us, or at least a Mist? wee are therefore yet in the Dark.




Four Causes Of Spirituall Darknesse

The Enemy has been here in the Night of our naturall Ignorance, and sown
the tares of Spirituall Errors; and that, First, by abusing, and
putting out the light of the Scriptures: For we erre, not knowing the
Scriptures. Secondly, by introducing the Daemonology of the Heathen
Poets, that is to say, their fabulous Doctrine concerning Daemons, which
are but Idols, or Phantasms of the braine, without any reall nature of
their own, distinct from humane fancy; such as are dead mens Ghosts, and
Fairies, and other matter of old Wives tales. Thirdly, by mixing with
the Scripture divers reliques of the Religion, and much of the vain and
erroneous Philosophy of the Greeks, especially of Aristotle. Fourthly,
by mingling with both these, false, or uncertain Traditions, and
fained, or uncertain History. And so we come to erre, by "giving heed
to seducing Spirits," and the Daemonology of such "as speak lies in
Hypocrisie," (or as it is in the Originall, 1 Tim. 4.1,2. "of those that
play the part of lyars") "with a seared conscience," that is, contrary
to their own knowledge. Concerning the first of these, which is the
Seducing of men by abuse of Scripture, I intend to speak briefly in this
Chapter.




Errors From Misinterpreting The Scriptures, Concerning The Kingdome
Of God

The greatest, and main abuse of Scripture, and to which almost all the
rest are either consequent, or subservient, is the wresting of it, to
prove that the Kingdome of God, mentioned so often in the Scripture, is
the present Church, or multitude of Christian men now living, or that
being dead, are to rise again at the last day: whereas the Kingdome of
God was first instituted by the Ministery of Moses, over the Jews onely;
who were therefore called his Peculiar People; and ceased afterward, in
the election of Saul, when they refused to be governed by God any more,
and demanded a King after the manner of the nations; which God himself
consented unto, as I have more at large proved before, in the 35.
Chapter. After that time, there was no other Kingdome of God in the
world, by any Pact, or otherwise, than he ever was, is, and shall be
King, of all men, and of all creatures, as governing according to his
Will, by his infinite Power. Neverthelesse, he promised by his Prophets
to restore this his Government to them again, when the time he hath in
his secret counsell appointed for it shall bee fully come, and when they
shall turn unto him by repentance, and amendment of life; and not
onely so, but he invited also the Gentiles to come in, and enjoy the
happinesse of his Reign, on the same conditions of conversion and
repentance; and hee promised also to send his Son into the world, to
expiate the sins of them all by his death, and to prepare them by his
Doctrine, to receive him at his second coming: Which second coming not
yet being, the Kingdome of God is not yet come, and wee are not now
under any other Kings by Pact, but our Civill Soveraigns; saving onely,
that Christian men are already in the Kingdome of Grace, in as much as
they have already the Promise of being received at his comming againe.




As That The Kingdome Of God Is The Present Church

Consequent to this Errour, that the present Church is Christs Kingdome,
there ought to be some one Man, or Assembly, by whose mouth our Saviour
(now in heaven) speaketh, giveth law, and which representeth his person
to all Christians, or divers Men, or divers Assemblies that doe the same
to divers parts of Christendome. This power Regal under Christ, being
challenged, universally by that Pope, and in particular Common-wealths
by Assemblies of the Pastors of the place, (when the Scripture gives it
to none but to Civill Soveraigns,) comes to be so passionately disputed,
that it putteth out the Light of Nature, and causeth so great a
Darknesse in mens understanding, that they see not who it is to whom
they have engaged their obedience.




And That The Pope Is His Vicar Generall

Consequent to this claim of the Pope to Vicar Generall of Christ in the
present Church, (supposed to be that Kingdom of his, to which we are
addressed in the Gospel,) is the Doctrine, that it is necessary for a
Christian King, to receive his Crown by a Bishop; as if it were from
that Ceremony, that he derives the clause of Dei Gratia in his title;
and that then onely he is made King by the favour of God, when he is
crowned by the authority of Gods universall Viceregent on earth; and
that every Bishop whosoever be his Soveraign, taketh at his Consecration
an oath of absolute Obedience to the Pope, Consequent to the same, is
the Doctrine of the fourth Councell of Lateran, held under Pope Innocent
the third, (Chap. 3. De Haereticis.) "That if a King at the Popes
admonition, doe not purge his Kingdome of Haeresies, and being
excommunicate for the same, doe not give satisfaction within a year,
his Subjects are absolved of the bond of their obedience." Where, by
Haeresies are understood all opinions which the Church of Rome hath
forbidden to be maintained. And by this means, as often as there is
any repugnancy between the Politicall designes of the Pope, and other
Christian Princes, as there is very often, there ariseth such a Mist
amongst their Subjects, that they know not a stranger that thrusteth
himself into the throne of their lawfull Prince, from him whom they
had themselves placed there; and in this Darknesse of mind, are made to
fight one against another, without discerning their enemies from their
friends, under the conduct of another mans ambition.




And That The Pastors Are The Clergy

From the same opinion, that the present Church is the Kingdome of God,
it proceeds that Pastours, Deacons, and all other Ministers of the
Church, take the name to themselves of the Clergy, giving to other
Christians the name of Laity, that is, simply People. For Clergy
signifies those, whose maintenance is that Revenue, which God having
reserved to himselfe during his Reigne over the Israelites, assigned
to the tribe of Levi (who were to be his publique Ministers, and had no
portion of land set them out to live on, as their brethren) to be their
inheritance. The Pope therefore, (pretending the present Church to be,
as the Realme of Israel, the Kingdome of God) challenging to himselfe
and his subordinate Ministers, the like revenue, as the Inheritance of
God, the name of Clergy was sutable to that claime. And thence it is,
that Tithes, or other tributes paid to the Levites, as Gods Right,
amongst the Israelites, have a long time been demanded, and taken of
Christians, by Ecclesiastiques, Jure Divino, that is, in Gods Right. By
which meanes, the people every where were obliged to a double tribute;
one to the State, another to the Clergy; whereof, that to the Clergy,
being the tenth of their revenue, is double to that which a King of
Athens (and esteemed a Tyrant) exacted of his subjects for the defraying
of all publique charges: For he demanded no more but the twentieth part;
and yet abundantly maintained therewith the Commonwealth. And in the
Kingdome of the Jewes, during the Sacerdotall Reigne of God, the Tithes
and Offerings were the whole Publique Revenue.

From the same mistaking of the present Church for the Kingdom of God,
came in the distinction betweene the Civill and the Canon Laws: The
civil Law being the acts of Soveraigns in their own Dominions, and
the Canon Law being the Acts of the Pope in the same Dominions. Which
Canons, though they were but Canons, that is, Rules Propounded, and but
voluntarily received by Christian Princes, till the translation of
the Empire to Charlemain; yet afterwards, as the power of the Pope
encreased, became Rules Commanded, and the Emperours themselves (to
avoyd greater mischiefes, which the people blinded might be led into)
were forced to let them passe for Laws.

From hence it is, that in all Dominions, where the Popes Ecclesiasticall
power is entirely received, Jewes, Turkes, and Gentiles, are in the
Roman Church tolerated in their Religion, as farre forth, as in the
exercise and profession thereof they offend not against the civill
power: whereas in a Christian, though a stranger, not to be of the Roman
Religion, is Capitall; because the Pope pretendeth that all Christians
are his Subjects. For otherwise it were as much against the law of
Nations, to persecute a Christian stranger, for professing the Religion
of his owne country, as an Infidell; or rather more, in as much as they
that are not against Christ, are with him.

From the same it is, that in every Christian State there are certaine
men, that are exempt, by Ecclesiasticall liberty, from the tributes, and
from the tribunals of the Civil State; for so are the secular Clergy,
besides Monks and Friars, which in many places, bear so great a
proportion to the common people, as if need were, there might be raised
out of them alone, an Army, sufficient for any warre the Church militant
should imploy them in, against their owne, or other Princes.




Error From Mistaking Consecration For Conjuration

A second generall abuse of Scripture, is the turning of Consecration
into Conjuration, or Enchantment. To Consecrate, is in Scripture, to
Offer, Give, or Dedicate, in pious and decent language and gesture, a
man, or any other thing to God, by separating of it from common use;
that is to say, to Sanctifie, or make it Gods, and to be used only by
those, whom God hath appointed to be his Publike Ministers, (as I have
already proved at large in the 35. Chapter;) and thereby to change, not
the thing Consecrated, but onely the use of it, from being Profane
and common, to be Holy, and peculiar to Gods service. But when by such
words, the nature of qualitie of the thing it selfe, is pretended to be
changed, it is not Consecration, but either an extraordinary worke of
God, or a vaine and impious Conjuration. But seeing (for the frequency
of pretending the change of Nature in their Consecrations,) it cannot
be esteemed a work extraordinary, it is no other than a Conjuration or
Incantation, whereby they would have men to beleeve an alteration of
Nature that is not, contrary to the testimony of mans Sight, and of all
the rest of his Senses. As for example, when the Priest, in stead of
Consecrating Bread and Wine to Gods peculiar service in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, (which is but a separation of it from the common use,
to signifie, that is, to put men in mind of their Redemption, by the
Passion of Christ, whose body was broken, and blood shed upon the Crosse
for our transgressions,) pretends, that by saying of the words of our
Saviour, "This is my Body," and "This is my Blood," the nature of Bread
is no more there, but his very Body; notwithstanding there appeared not
to the Sight, or other Sense of the Receiver, any thing that appeareth
not before the Consecration. The Egyptian Conjurers, that are said
to have turned their Rods to Serpents, and the Water into Bloud, are
thought but to have deluded the senses of the Spectators by a false shew
of things, yet are esteemed Enchanters: But what should wee have thought
of them, if there had appeared in their Rods nothing like a Serpent, and
in the Water enchanted, nothing like Bloud, nor like any thing else but
Water, but that they had faced down the King, that they were Serpents
that looked like Rods, and that it was Bloud that seemed Water? That
had been both Enchantment, and Lying. And yet in this daily act of
the Priest, they doe the very same, by turning the holy words into the
manner of a Charme, which produceth nothing now to the Sense; but they
face us down, that it hath turned the Bread into a Man; nay more, into
a God; and require men to worship it, as if it were our Saviour himself
present God and Man, and thereby to commit most grosse Idolatry. For if
it bee enough to excuse it of Idolatry, to say it is no more Bread, but
God; why should not the same excuse serve the Egyptians, in case they
had the faces to say, the Leeks, and Onyons they worshipped, were
not very Leeks, and Onyons, but a Divinity under their Species, or
likenesse. The words, "This is my Body," are aequivalent to these,
"This signifies, or represents my Body;" and it is an ordinary figure of
Speech: but to take it literally, is an abuse; nor though so taken, can
it extend any further, than to the Bread which Christ himself with his
own hands Consecrated. For hee never said, that of what Bread soever,
any Priest whatsoever, should say, "This is my Body," or, "This is
Christs Body," the same should presently be transubstantiated. Nor did
the Church of Rome ever establish this Transubstantiation, till the time
of Innocent the third; which was not above 500. years agoe, when the
Power of Popes was at the Highest, and the Darknesse of the time grown
so great, as men discerned not the Bread that was given them to eat,
especially when it was stamped with the figure of Christ upon the
Crosse, as if they would have men beleeve it were Transubstantiated, not
onely into the Body of Christ, but also into the Wood of his Crosse, and
that they did eat both together in the Sacrament.




Incantation In The Ceremonies Of Baptisme

The like incantation, in stead of Consecration, is used also in the
Sacrament of Baptisme: Where the abuse of Gods name in each severall
Person, and in the whole Trinity, with the sign of the Crosse at each
name, maketh up the Charm: As first, when they make the Holy water, the
Priest saith, "I Conjure thee, thou Creature of Water, in the name of
God the Father Almighty, and in the name of Jesus Christ his onely Son
our Lord, and in vertue of the Holy Ghost, that thou become Conjured
water, to drive away all the Powers of the Enemy, and to eradicate, and
supplant the Enemy, &c." And the same in the Benediction of the Salt
to be mingled with it; "That thou become Conjured Salt, that all
Phantasmes, and Knavery of the Devills fraud may fly and depart from the
place wherein thou art sprinkled; and every unclean Spirit bee Conjured
by Him that shall come to judge the quicke and the dead." The same in
the Benediction of the Oyle. "That all the Power of the Enemy, all the
Host of the Devill, all Assaults and Phantasmes of Satan, may be
driven away by this Creature of Oyle." And for the Infant that is to be
Baptized, he is subject to many Charms; First, at the Church dore the
Priest blows thrice in the Childs face, and sayes, "Goe out of him
unclean Spirit, and give place to the Holy Ghost the Comforter." As
if all Children, till blown on by the Priest were Daemoniaques: Again,
before his entrance into the Church, he saith as before, "I Conjure
thee, &c. to goe out, and depart from this Servant of God:" And again
the same Exorcisme is repeated once more before he be Baptized. These,
and some other Incantations, and Consecrations, in administration of the
Sacraments of Baptisme, and the Lords Supper; wherein every thing that
serveth to those holy men (except the unhallowed Spittle of the Priest)
hath some set form of Exorcisme.




In Marriage, In Visitation Of The Sick, And In Consecration Of Places

Nor are the other rites, as of Marriage, of Extreme Unction, of
Visitation of the Sick, of Consecrating Churches, and Church-yards, and
the like, exempt from Charms; in as much as there is in them the use of
Enchanted Oyle, and Water, with the abuse of the Crosse, and of the holy
word of David, "Asperges me Domine Hyssopo," as things of efficacy to
drive away Phantasmes, and Imaginery Spirits.




Errors From Mistaking Eternall Life, And Everlasting Death

Another generall Error, is from the Misinterpretation of the words
Eternall Life, Everlasting Death, and the Second Death. For though we
read plainly in Holy Scripture, that God created Adam in an estate of
Living for Ever, which was conditionall, that is to say, if he disobeyed
not his Commandement; which was not essentiall to Humane Nature, but
consequent to the vertue of the Tree of Life; whereof hee had liberty
to eat, as long as hee had not sinned; and that hee was thrust out of
Paradise after he had sinned, lest hee should eate thereof, and live for
ever; and that Christs Passion is a Discharge of sin to all that beleeve
on him; and by consequence, a restitution of Eternall Life, to all the
Faithfull, and to them onely: yet the Doctrine is now, and hath been a
long time far otherwise; namely, that every man hath Eternity of Life by
Nature, in as much as his Soul is Immortall: So that the flaming Sword
at the entrance of Paradise, though it hinder a man from coming to the
Tree of Life, hinders him not from the Immortality which God took from
him for his Sin; nor makes him to need the sacrificing of Christ, for
the recovering of the same; and consequently, not onely the faithfull
and righteous, but also the wicked, and the Heathen, shall enjoy
Eternall Life, without any Death at all; much lesse a Second, and
Everlasting Death. To salve this, it is said, that by Second, and
Everlasting Death, is meant a Second, and Everlasting Life, but in
Torments; a Figure never used, but in this very Case.

All which Doctrine is founded onely on some of the obscurer places of
the New Testament; which neverthelesse, the whole scope of the Scripture
considered, are cleer enough in a different sense, and unnecessary to
the Christian Faith. For supposing that when a man dies, there remaineth
nothing of him but his carkasse; cannot God that raised inanimated dust
and clay into a living creature by his Word, as easily raise a dead
carkasse to life again, and continue him alive for Ever, or make him
die again, by another Word? The Soule in Scripture, signifieth alwaies,
either the Life, or the Living Creature; and the Body and Soule jointly,
the Body Alive. In the fift day of the Creation, God said, Let the water
produce Reptile Animae Viventis, the creeping thing that hath in it a
Living Soule; the English translate it, "that hath Life:" And again,
God created Whales, "& omnem animam viventem;" which in the English is,
"every living Creature:" And likewise of Man, God made him of the dust
of the earth, and breathed in his face the breath of Life, "& factus est
Homo in animam viventem," that is, "and Man was made a Living Creature;"
And after Noah came out of the Arke, God saith, hee will no more smite
"omnem animam viventem," that is "every Living Creature;" And Deut.
12.23. "Eate not the Bloud, for the Bloud is the Soule;" that is
"the Life." From which places, if by Soule were meant a Substance
Incorporeall, with an existence separated from the Body, it might as
well be inferred of any other living Creature, as of Man. But that
the Souls of the Faithfull, are not of their own Nature, but by Gods
speciall Grace, to remaine in their bodies, from the Resurrection to
all Eternity, I have already I think sufficiently proved out of the
Scriptures, in the 38. Chapter. And for the places of the New Testament,
where it is said that any man shall be cast Body and Soul into Hell
fire, it is no more than Body and Life; that is to say, they shall be
cast alive into the perpetuall fire of Gehenna.




As The Doctrine Of Purgatory, And Exorcismes, And Invocation Of Saints

This window it is, that gives entrance to the Dark Doctrine, first, of
Eternall Torments; and afterwards of Purgatory, and consequently of the
walking abroad, especially in places Consecrated, Solitary, or Dark, of
the Ghosts of men deceased; and thereby to the pretences of Exorcisme
and Conjuration of Phantasmes; as also of Invocation of men dead; and to
the Doctrine of Indulgences; that is to say, of exemption for a time,
or for ever, from the fire of Purgatory, wherein these Incorporeall
Substances are pretended by burning to be cleansed, and made fit
for Heaven. For men being generally possessed before the time of our
Saviour, by contagion of the Daemonology of the Greeks, of an opinion,
that the Souls of men were substances distinct from their Bodies, and
therefore that when the Body was dead, the Soule of every man, whether
godly, or wicked, must subsist somewhere by vertue of its own nature,
without acknowledging therein any supernaturall gift of Gods; the
Doctors of the Church doubted a long time, what was the place, which
they were to abide in, till they should be re-united to their Bodies in
the Resurrection; supposing for a while, they lay under the Altars: but
afterward the Church of Rome found it more profitable, to build for them
this place of Purgatory; which by some other Churches in this later age,
has been demolished.




The Texts Alledged For The Doctrines Aforementioned Have Been Answered
Before

Let us now consider, what texts of Scripture seem most to confirm these
three generall Errors, I have here touched. As for those which Cardinall
Bellarmine hath alledged, for the present Kingdome of God administred by
the Pope, (than which there are none that make a better show of proof,)
I have already answered them; and made it evident, that the Kingdome
of God, instituted by Moses, ended in the election of Saul: After which
time the Priest of his own authority never deposed any King. That which
the High Priest did to Athaliah, was not done in his own right, but in
the right of the young King Joash her Son: But Solomon in his own right
deposed the High Priest Abiathar, and set up another in his place. The
most difficult place to answer, of all those than can be brought,
to prove the Kingdome of God by Christ is already in this world, is
alledged, not by Bellarmine, nor any other of the Church of Rome; but
by Beza; that will have it to begin from the Resurrection of Christ.
But whether hee intend thereby, to entitle the Presbytery to the Supreme
Power Ecclesiasticall in the Common-wealth of Geneva, (and consequently
to every Presbytery in every other Common-wealth,) or to Princes,
and other Civill Soveraignes, I doe not know. For the Presbytery hath
challenged the power to Excommunicate their owne Kings, and to bee the
Supreme Moderators in Religion, in the places where they have that form
of Church government, no lesse then the Pope challengeth it universally.




Answer To The Text On Which Beza Infereth

That The Kingdome Of Christ Began At The Resurrection The words are
(Marke 9.1.) "Verily, I say unto you, that there be some of them that
stand here, which shall not tast of death, till they have seene the
Kingdome of God come with power." Which words, if taken grammatically,
make it certaine, that either some of those men that stood by Christ at
that time, are yet alive; or else, that the Kingdome of God must be now
in this present world. And then there is another place more difficult:
For when the Apostles after our Saviours Resurrection, and immediately
before his Ascension, asked our Saviour, saying, (Acts.1.6.) "Wilt thou
at this time restore again the Kingdome to Israel," he answered them,
"It is not for you to know the times and the seasons, which the Father
hath put in his own power; But ye shall receive power by the comming of
the Holy Ghost upon you, and yee shall be my (Martyrs) witnesses both in
Jerusalem, & in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part
of the Earth:" Which is as much as to say, My Kingdome is not yet come,
nor shall you foreknow when it shall come, for it shall come as a theefe
in the night; But I will send you the Holy Ghost, and by him you shall
have power to beare witnesse to all the world (by your preaching) of
my Resurrection, and the workes I have done, and the doctrine I have
taught, that they may beleeve in me, and expect eternall life, at my
comming againe: How does this agree with the comming of Christs Kingdome
at the Resurrection? And that which St. Paul saies (1 Thessal. 1.9, 10.)
"That they turned from Idols, to serve the living and true God, and
to waite for his Sonne from Heaven:" Where to waite for his Sonne from
Heaven, is to wait for his comming to be King in power; which were
not necessary, if this Kingdome had beene then present. Againe, if the
Kingdome of God began (as Beza on that place (Mark 9.1.) would have it)
at the Resurrection; what reason is there for Christians ever since the
Resurrection to say in their prayers, "Let thy Kingdome Come"? It
is therefore manifest, that the words of St. Mark are not so to be
interpreted. There be some of them that stand here (saith our Saviour)
that shall not tast of death till they have seen the Kingdome of God
come in power. If then this Kingdome were to come at the Resurrection
of Christ, why is it said, "some of them" rather than all? For they all
lived till after Christ was risen.




Explication Of The Place In Mark 9.1

But they that require an exact interpretation of this text, let them
interpret first the like words of our Saviour to St. Peter concerning
St. John, (chap. 21.22.) "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee?" upon which was grounded a report that hee should not dye:
Neverthelesse the truth of that report was neither confirmed, as well
grounded; nor refuted, as ill grounded on those words; but left as a
saying not understood. The same difficulty is also in the place of St.
Marke. And if it be lawfull to conjecture at their meaning, by that
which immediately followes, both here, and in St. Luke, where the same
is againe repeated, it is not unprobable, to say they have relation
to the Transfiguration, which is described in the verses immediately
following; where it is said, that "After six dayes Jesus taketh with
him Peter, and James, and John (not all, but some of his Disciples)
and leadeth them up into an high mountaine apart by themselves, and
was transfigured before them. And his rayment became shining, exceeding
white as snow; so as no Fuller on earth can white them. And there
appeared unto them Elias with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus,
&c." So that they saw Christ in Glory and Majestie, as he is to come;
insomuch as "They were sore afraid." And thus the promise of our Saviour
was accomplished by way of Vision: For it was a Vision, as may probably
bee inferred out of St. Luke, that reciteth the same story (ch. 9. ve.
28.) and saith, that Peter and they that were with him, were heavy with
sleep; But most certainly out of Matth. 17.9. (where the same is again
related;) for our Saviour charged them, saying, "Tell no man the Vision
untill the Son of man be Risen from the dead." Howsoever it be, yet
there can from thence be taken no argument, to prove that the Kingdome
of God taketh beginning till the day of Judgement.




Abuse Of Some Other Texts In Defence Of The Power Of The Pope

As for some other texts, to prove the Popes Power over civill
Soveraignes (besides those of Bellarmine;) as that the two Swords that
Christ and his Apostles had amongst them, were the Spirituall and the
Temporall Sword, which they say St. Peter had given him by Christ: And,
that of the two Luminaries, the greater signifies the Pope, and the
lesser the King; One might as well inferre out of the first verse of the
Bible, that by Heaven is meant the Pope, and by Earth the King: Which
is not arguing from Scripture, but a wanton insulting over Princes, that
came in fashion after the time the Popes were growne so secure of their
greatnesse, as to contemne all Christian Kings; and Treading on the
necks of Emperours, to mocke both them, and the Scripture, in the words
of the 91. Psalm, "Thou shalt Tread upon the Lion and the Adder, the
young Lion and the Dragon thou shalt Trample under thy feet."




The Manner Of Consecrations In The Scripture, Was Without Exorcisms

As for the rites of Consecration, though they depend for the most part
upon the discretion and judgement of the governors of the Church,
and not upon the Scriptures; yet those governors are obliged to such
direction, as the nature of the action it selfe requireth; as that the
ceremonies, words, and gestures, be both decent, and significant, or at
least conformable to the action. When Moses consecrated the Tabernacle,
the Altar, and the Vessels belonging to them (Exod. 40.) he anointed
them with the Oyle which God had commanded to bee made for that
purpose; and they were holy; There was nothing Exorcised, to drive away
Phantasmes. The same Moses (the civill Soveraigne of Israel) when he
consecrated Aaron (the High Priest,) and his Sons, did wash them with
Water, (not Exorcised water,) put their Garments upon them, and anointed
them with Oyle; and they were sanctified, to minister unto the Lord
in the Priests office; which was a simple and decent cleansing, and
adorning them, before hee presented them to God, to be his servants.
When King Solomon, (the civill Soveraigne of Israel) consecrated the
Temple hee had built, (2 Kings 8.) he stood before all the Congregation
of Israel; and having blessed them, he gave thanks to God, for putting
into the heart of his father, to build it; and for giving to himselfe
the grace to accomplish the same; and then prayed unto him, first,
to accept that House, though it were not sutable to his infinite
Greatnesse; and to hear the prayers of his Servants that should pray
therein, or (if they were absent) towards it; and lastly, he offered a
sacrifice of Peace-offering, and the House was dedicated. Here was no
Procession; the King stood still in his first place; no Exorcised Water;
no Asperges Me, nor other impertinent application of words spoken upon
another occasion; but a decent, and rationall speech, and such as in
making to God a present of his new built House, was most conformable
to the occasion. We read not that St. John did Exorcise the Water
of Jordan; nor Philip the Water of the river wherein he baptized the
Eunuch; nor that any Pastor in the time of the Apostles, did take his
spittle, and put it to the nose of the person to be Baptized, and say,
"In odorem suavitatis," that is, "for a sweet savour unto the Lord;"
wherein neither the Ceremony of Spittle, for the uncleannesse; nor the
application of that Scripture for the levity, can by any authority of
man be justified.




The Immortality Of Mans Soule, Not Proved By Scripture To Be Of Nature,
But Of Grace

To prove that the Soule separated from the Body liveth eternally, not
onely the Soules of the Elect, by especiall grace, and restauration of
the Eternall Life which Adam lost by Sinne, and our Saviour restored
by the Sacrifice of himself, to the Faithfull, but also the Soules
of Reprobates, as a property naturally consequent to the essence of
mankind, without other grace of God, but that which is universally given
to all mankind; there are divers places, which at the first sight seem
sufficiently to serve the turn: but such, as when I compare them with
that which I have before (Chapter 38.) alledged out of the 14 of Job,
seem to mee much more subject to a divers interpretation, than the words
of Job.

And first there are the words of Solomon (Ecclesiastes 12.7.) "Then
shall the Dust return to Dust, as it was, and the Spirit shall return to
God that gave it." Which may bear well enough (if there be no other text
directly against it) this interpretation, that God onely knows, (but
Man not,) what becomes of a mans spirit, when he expireth; and the same
Solomon, in the same Book, (Chap. 3. ver. 20,21.) delivereth in the same
sentence in the sense I have given it: His words are, "All goe, (man
and beast) to the same place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust
again; who knoweth that the spirit of Man goeth upward, and the spirit
of the Beast goeth downward to the earth?" That is, none knows but God;
Nor is it an unusuall phrase to say of things we understand not, "God
knows what," and "God knows where." That of Gen. 5.24. "Enoch walked
with God, and he was not; for God took him;" which is expounded Heb.
13.5. "He was translated, that he should not die; and was not found,
because God had translated him. For before his Translation, he had this
testimony, that he pleased God," making as much for the Immortality
of the Body, as of the Soule, proveth, that this his translation was
peculiar to them that please God; not common to them with the wicked;
and depending on Grace, not on Nature. But on the contrary, what
interpretation shall we give, besides the literall sense of the words of
Solomon (Eccles. 3.19.) "That which befalleth the Sons of Men, befalleth
Beasts, even one thing befalleth them; as the one dyeth, so doth the
other; yea, they have all one breath (one spirit;) so that a Man hath no
praeeminence above a Beast, for all is vanity." By the literall sense,
here is no Naturall Immortality of the Soule; nor yet any repugnancy
with the Life Eternall, which the Elect shall enjoy by Grace. And (chap.
4. ver.3.) "Better is he that hath not yet been, than both they;" that
is, than they that live, or have lived; which, if the Soule of all them
that have lived, were Immortall, were a hard saying; for then to have
an Immortall Soule, were worse than to have no Soule at all. And
againe,(Chapt. 9.5.) "The living know they shall die, but the dead know
not any thing;" that is, Naturally, and before the resurrection of the
body.

Another place which seems to make for a Naturall Immortality of the
Soule, is that, where our Saviour saith, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
are living: but this is spoken of the promise of God, and of their
certitude to rise again, not of a Life then actuall; and in the same
sense that God said to Adam, that on the day hee should eate of the
forbidden fruit, he should certainly die; from that time forward he was
a dead man by sentence; but not by execution, till almost a thousand
years after. So Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were alive by promise, then,
when Christ spake; but are not actually till the Resurrection. And the
History of Dives and Lazarus, make nothing against this, if wee take it
(as it is) for a Parable.

But there be other places of the New Testament, where an Immortality
seemeth to be directly attributed to the wicked. For it is evident, that
they shall all rise to Judgement. And it is said besides in many places,
that they shall goe into "Everlasting fire, Everlasting torments,
Everlasting punishments; and that the worm of conscience never dyeth;"
and all this is comprehended in the word Everlasting Death, which is
ordinarily interpreted Everlasting Life In Torments: And yet I can find
no where that any man shall live in torments Everlastingly. Also, it
seemeth hard, to say, that God who is the Father of Mercies, that doth
in Heaven and Earth all that hee will; that hath the hearts of all men
in his disposing; that worketh in men both to doe, and to will; and
without whose free gift a man hath neither inclination to good, nor
repentance of evill, should punish mens transgressions without any end
of time, and with all the extremity of torture, that men can imagine,
and more. We are therefore to consider, what the meaning is, of
Everlasting Fire, and other the like phrases of Scripture.

I have shewed already, that the Kingdome of God by Christ beginneth at
the day of Judgment: That in that day, the Faithfull shall rise again,
with glorious, and spirituall Bodies, and bee his Subjects in that his
Kingdome, which shall be Eternall; That they shall neither marry, nor
be given in marriage, nor eate and drink, as they did in their naturall
bodies; but live for ever in their individuall persons, without the
specificall eternity of generation: And that the Reprobates also shall
rise again, to receive punishments for their sins: As also, that those
of the Elect, which shall be alive in their earthly bodies at that
day, shall have their bodies suddenly changed, and made spirituall, and
Immortall. But that the bodies of the Reprobate, who make the Kingdome
of Satan, shall also be glorious, or spirituall bodies, or that they
shall bee as the Angels of God, neither eating, nor drinking, nor
engendring; or that their life shall be Eternall in their individuall
persons, as the life of every faithfull man is, or as the life of Adam
had been if hee had not sinned, there is no place of Scripture to prove
it; save onely these places concerning Eternall Torments; which may
otherwise be interpreted.

From whence may be inferred, that as the Elect after the Resurrection
shall be restored to the estate, wherein Adam was before he had sinned;
so the Reprobate shall be in the estate, that Adam, and his posterity
were in after the sin committed; saving that God promised a Redeemer to
Adam, and such of his seed as should trust in him, and repent; but not
to them that should die in their sins, as do the Reprobate.




Eternall Torments What

These things considered, the texts that mention Eternall Fire, Eternal
Torments, or the Word That Never Dieth, contradict not the Doctrine of
a Second, and Everlasting Death, in the proper and naturall sense of the
word Death. The Fire, or Torments prepared for the wicked in Gehenna,
Tophet, or in what place soever, may continue for ever; and there may
never want wicked men to be tormented in them; though not every, nor
any one Eternally. For the wicked being left in the estate they were in
after Adams sin, may at the Resurrection live as they did, marry, and
give in marriage, and have grosse and corruptible bodies, as all
mankind now have; and consequently may engender perpetually, after the
Resurrection, as they did before: For there is no place of Scripture to
the contrary. For St. Paul, speaking of the Resurrection (1 Cor. 15.)
understandeth it onely of the Resurrection to Life Eternall; and not the
Resurrection to Punishment. And of the first, he saith that the Body is
"Sown in Corruption, raised in Incorruption; sown in Dishonour, raised
in Honour; sown in Weaknesse, raised in Power; sown a Naturall body,
raised a Spirituall body:" There is no such thing can be said of the
bodies of them that rise to Punishment. The text is Luke 20. Verses
34,35,36. a fertile text. "The Children of this world marry, and are
given in marriage; but they that shall be counted worthy to obtaine that
world, and the Resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given
in marriage: Neither can they die any more; for they are equall to
the Angells, and are the Children of God, being the Children of the
Resurrection:" The Children of this world, that are in the estate
which Adam left them in, shall marry, and be given in marriage; that is
corrupt, and generate successively; which is an Immortality of the Kind,
but not of the Persons of men: They are not worthy to be counted amongst
them that shall obtain the next world, and an absolute Resurrection from
the dead; but onely a short time, as inmates of that world; and to the
end onely to receive condign punishment for their contumacy. The Elect
are the onely children of the Resurrection; that is to say the sole
heirs of Eternall Life: they only can die no more; it is they that are
equall to the Angels, and that are the children of God; and not the
Reprobate. To the Reprobate there remaineth after the Resurrection,
a Second, and Eternall Death: between which Resurrection, and their
Second, and Eternall death, is but a time of Punishment and Torment; and
to last by succession of sinners thereunto, as long as the kind of Man
by propagation shall endure, which is Eternally.




Answer Of The Texts Alledged For Purgatory

Upon this Doctrine of the Naturall Eternity of separated Soules, is
founded (as I said) the Doctrine of Purgatory. For supposing Eternall
Life by Grace onely, there is no Life, but the Life of the Body; and no
Immortality till the Resurrection. The texts for Purgatory alledged by
Bellarmine out of the Canonicall Scripture of the old Testament, are
first, the Fasting of David for Saul and Jonathan, mentioned (2 Kings,
1. 12.); and againe, (2 Sam. 3. 35.) for the death of Abner. This
Fasting of David, he saith, was for the obtaining of something for them
at Gods hands, after their death; because after he had Fasted to procure
the recovery of his owne child, assoone as he know it was dead, he
called for meate. Seeing then the Soule hath an existence separate from
the Body, and nothing can be obtained by mens Fasting for the Soules
that are already either in Heaven, or Hell, it followeth that there be
some Soules of dead men, what are neither in Heaven, nor in Hell; and
therefore they must bee in some third place, which must be Purgatory.
And thus with hard straining, hee has wrested those places to the proofe
of a Purgatory; whereas it is manifest, that the ceremonies of Mourning,
and Fasting, when they are used for the death of men, whose life was
not profitable to the Mourners, they are used for honours sake to their
persons; and when tis done for the death of them by whose life the
Mourners had benefit, it proceeds from their particular dammage: And so
David honoured Saul, and Abner, with his Fasting; and in the death of
his owne child, recomforted himselfe, by receiving his ordinary food.

In the other places, which he alledgeth out of the old Testament, there
is not so much as any shew, or colour of proofe. He brings in every text
wherein there is the word Anger, or Fire, or Burning, or Purging, or
Clensing, in case any of the Fathers have but in a Sermon rhetorically
applied it to the Doctrine of Purgatory, already beleeved. The first
verse of Psalme, 37. "O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, nor chasten me
in thy hot displeasure:" What were this to Purgatory, if Augustine had
not applied the Wrath to the fire of Hell, and the Displeasure, to that
of Purgatory? And what is it to Purgatory, that of Psalme, 66. 12. "Wee
went through fire and water, and thou broughtest us to a moist place;"
and other the like texts, (with which the Doctors of those times
entended to adorne, or extend their Sermons, or Commentaries) haled to
their purposes by force of wit?




Places Of The New Testament For Purgatory Answered

But he alledgeth other places of the New Testament, that are not
so easie to be answered: And first that of Matth. 12.32. "Whosoever
speaketh a word against the Sonne of man, it shall be forgiven him; but
whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not bee forgiven
him neither in this world, nor in the world to come:" Where he will have
Purgatory to be the World to come, wherein some sinnes may be forgiven,
which in this World were not forgiven: notwithstanding that it is
manifest, there are but three Worlds; one from the Creation to the
Flood, which was destroyed by Water, and is called in Scripture the
Old World; another from the Flood to the day of Judgement, which is the
Present World, and shall bee destroyed by Fire; and the third, which
shall bee from the day of Judgement forward, everlasting, which is
called the World To Come; and in which it is agreed by all, there shall
be no Purgatory; And therefore the World to come, and Purgatory, are
inconsistent. But what then can bee the meaning of those our Saviours
words? I confesse they are very hardly to bee reconciled with all the
Doctrines now unanimously received: Nor is it any shame, to confesse the
profoundnesse of the Scripture, to bee too great to be sounded by the
shortnesse of humane understanding. Neverthelesse, I may propound such
things to the consideration of more learned Divines, as the text it
selfe suggesteth. And first, seeing to speake against the Holy Ghost, as
being the third Person of the Trinity, is to speake against the Church,
in which the Holy Ghost resideth; it seemeth the comparison is made,
betweene the Easinesse of our Saviour, in bearing with offences done to
him while he was on earth, and the Severity of the Pastors after him,
against those which should deny their authority, which was from the Holy
Ghost: As if he should say, You that deny my Power; nay you that shall
crucifie me, shall be pardoned by mee, as often as you turne unto mee by
Repentance: But if you deny the Power of them that teach you hereafter,
by vertue of the Holy Ghost, they shall be inexorable, and shall not
forgive you, but persecute you in this World, and leave you without
absolution, (though you turn to me, unlesse you turn also to them,) to
the punishments (as much as lies in them) of the World to come: And
so the words may be taken as a Prophecy, or Praediction concerning the
times, as they have along been in the Christian Church: Or if this be
not the meaning, (for I am not peremptory in such difficult places,)
perhaps there may be place left after the Resurrection for the
Repentance of some sinners: And there is also another place, that
seemeth to agree therewith. For considering the words of St. Paul (1
Cor. 15. 29.) "What shall they doe which are Baptized for the dead, if
the dead rise not at all? why also are they Baptized for the dead?" a
man may probably inferre, as some have done, that in St. Pauls time,
there was a custome by receiving Baptisme for the dead, (as men that now
beleeve, are Sureties and Undertakers for the Faith of Infants, that
are not capable of beleeving,) to undertake for the persons of their
deceased friends, that they should be ready to obey, and receive our
Saviour for their King, at his coming again; and then the forgivenesse
of sins in the world to come, has no need of a Purgatory. But in both
these interpretations, there is so much of paradox, that I trust not
to them; but propound them to those that are throughly versed in the
Scripture, to inquire if there be no clearer place that contradicts
them. Onely of thus much, I see evident Scripture, to perswade men, that
there is neither the word, nor the thing of Purgatory, neither in this,
nor any other text; nor any thing that can prove a necessity of a place
for the Soule without the Body; neither for the Soule of Lazarus during
the four days he was dead; nor for the Soules of them which the Romane
Church pretend to be tormented now in Purgatory. For God, that could
give a life to a peece of clay, hath the same power to give life again
to a dead man, and renew his inanimate, and rotten Carkasse, into a
glorious, spirituall, and immortall Body.

Another place is that of 1 Cor. 3. where it is said that they which
built Stubble, Hay, &c. on the true Foundation, their work shall perish;
but "they themselves shall be saved; but as through Fire:" This Fire, he
will have to be the Fire of Purgatory. The words, as I have said before,
are an allusion to those of Zach. 13. 9. where he saith, "I will bring
the third part through the Fire, and refine them as Silver is refined,
and will try them as Gold is tryed;" Which is spoken of the comming of
the Messiah in Power and Glory; that is, at the day of Judgment, and
Conflagration of the present world; wherein the Elect shall not be
consumed, but be refined; that is, depose their erroneous Doctrines, and
Traditions, and have them as it were sindged off; and shall afterwards
call upon the name of the true God. In like manner, the Apostle saith
of them, that holding this Foundation Jesus Is The Christ, shall build
thereon some other Doctrines that be erroneous, that they shall not be
consumed in that fire which reneweth the world, but shall passe through
it to Salvation; but so, as to see, and relinquish their former Errours.
The Builders, are the Pastors; the Foundation, that Jesus Is The Christ;
the Stubble and Hay, False Consequences Drawn From It Through Ignorance,
Or Frailty; the Gold, Silver, and pretious Stones, are their True
Doctrines; and their Refining or Purging, the Relinquishing Of Their
Errors. In all which there is no colour at all for the burning of
Incorporeall, that is to say, Impatible Souls.




Baptisme For The Dead, How Understood

A third place is that of 1 Cor. 15. before mentioned, concerning
Baptisme for the Dead: out of which he concludeth, first, that Prayers
for the Dead are not unprofitable; and out of that, that there is a Fire
of Purgatory: But neither of them rightly. For of many interpretations
of the word Baptisme, he approveth this in the first place, that by
Baptisme is meant (metaphorically) a Baptisme of Penance; and that men
are in this sense Baptized, when they Fast, and Pray, and give Almes:
And so Baptisme for the Dead, and Prayer of the Dead, is the same thing.
But this is a Metaphor, of which there is no example, neither in
the Scripture, nor in any other use of language; and which is also
discordant to the harmony, and scope of the Scripture. The word Baptisme
is used (Mar. 10. 38. & Luk. 12. 59.) for being Dipped in ones own
bloud, as Christ was upon the Cross, and as most of the Apostles
were, for giving testimony of him. But it is hard to say, that Prayer,
Fasting, and Almes, have any similitude with Dipping. The same is used
also Mat. 3. 11. (which seemeth to make somewhat for Purgatory) for
a Purging with Fire. But it is evident the Fire and Purging here
mentioned, is the same whereof the Prophet Zachary speaketh (chap. 13.
v. 9.) "I will bring the third part through the Fire, and will Refine
them, &c." And St. Peter after him (1 Epist. 1. 7.) "That the triall
of your Faith, which is much more precious than of Gold that perisheth,
though it be tryed with fire, might be found unto praise, and honour,
and glory at the Appearing of Jesus Christ;" And St. Paul (1 Cor. 3.
13.) The Fire shall trie every mans work of what sort it is." But
St. Peter, and St. Paul speak of the Fire that shall be at the Second
Appearing of Christ; and the Prophet Zachary of the Day of Judgment: And
therefore this place of S. Mat. may be interpreted of the same; and then
there will be no necessity of the Fire of Purgatory.

Another interpretation of Baptisme for the Dead, is that which I
have before mentioned, which he preferreth to the second place of
probability; And thence also he inferreth the utility of Prayer for the
Dead. For if after the Resurrection, such as have not heard of Christ,
or not beleeved in him, may be received into Christs Kingdome; it is
not in vain, after their death, that their friends should pray for them,
till they should be risen. But granting that God, at the prayers of the
faithfull, may convert unto him some of those that have not heard Christ
preached, and consequently cannot have rejected Christ, and that the
charity of men in that point, cannot be blamed; yet this concludeth
nothing for Purgatory, because to rise from Death to Life, is one thing;
to rise from Purgatory to Life is another; and being a rising from Life
to Life, from a Life in torments to a Life in joy.

A fourth place is that of Mat. 5. 25. "Agree with thine Adversary
quickly, whilest thou art in the way with him, lest at any time the
Adversary deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into prison.
Verily I say unto thee, thou shalt by no means come out thence, till
thou has paid the uttermost farthing." In which Allegory, the Offender
is the Sinner; both the Adversary and the Judge is God; the Way is
this Life; the Prison is the Grave; the Officer, Death; from which, the
sinner shall not rise again to life eternall, but to a second Death,
till he have paid the utmost farthing, or Christ pay it for him by his
Passion, which is a full Ransome for all manner of sin, as well lesser
sins, as greater crimes; both being made by the passion of Christ
equally veniall.

The fift place, is that of Matth. 5. 22. "Whosoever is angry with his
Brother without a cause, shall be guilty in Judgment. And whosoever
shall say to his Brother, RACHA, shall be guilty in the Councel. But
whosoever shall say, Thou Foole, shall be guilty to hell fire." From
which words he inferreth three sorts of Sins, and three sorts of
Punishments; and that none of those sins, but the last, shall be
punished with hell fire; and consequently, that after this life, there
is punishment of lesser sins in Purgatory. Of which inference, there is
no colour in any interpretation that hath yet been given to them: Shall
there be a distinction after this life of Courts of Justice, as there
was amongst the Jews in our Saviours time, to hear, and determine
divers sorts of Crimes; as the Judges, and the Councell? Shall not
all Judicature appertain to Christ, and his Apostles? To understand
therefore this text, we are not to consider it solitarily, but jointly
with the words precedent, and subsequent. Our Saviour in this Chapter
interpreteth the Law of Moses; which the Jews thought was then
fulfilled, when they had not transgressed the Grammaticall sense
thereof, howsoever they had transgressed against the sentence, or
meaning of the Legislator. Therefore whereas they thought the Sixth
Commandement was not broken, but by Killing a man; nor the Seventh, but
when a man lay with a woman, not his wife; our Saviour tells them, the
inward Anger of a man against his brother, if it be without just cause,
is Homicide: You have heard (saith hee) the Law of Moses, "Thou shalt
not Kill," and that "Whosoever shall Kill, shall be condemned before the
Judges," or before the Session of the Seventy: But I say unto you, to
be Angry with ones Brother without cause; or to say unto him Racha, or
Foole, is Homicide, and shall be punished at the day of Judgment, and
Session of Christ, and his Apostles, with Hell fire: so that those words
were not used to distinguish between divers Crimes, and divers Courts
of Justice, and divers Punishments; but to taxe the distinction between
sin, and sin, which the Jews drew not from the difference of the Will
in Obeying God, but from the difference of their Temporall Courts of
Justice; and to shew them that he that had the Will to hurt his Brother,
though the effect appear but in Reviling, or not at all, shall be cast
into hell fire, by the Judges, and by the Session, which shall be the
same, not different Courts at the day of Judgment. This Considered, what
can be drawn from this text, to maintain Purgatory, I cannot imagine.

The sixth place is Luke 16. 9. "Make yee friends of the unrighteous
Mammon, that when yee faile, they may receive you into Everlasting
Tabernacles." This he alledges to prove Invocation of Saints departed.
But the sense is plain, That we should make friends with our Riches, of
the Poore, and thereby obtain their Prayers whilest they live. "He that
giveth to the Poore, lendeth to the Lord. "The seventh is Luke 23. 42.
"Lord remember me when thou commest into thy Kingdome:" Therefore, saith
hee, there is Remission of sins after this life. But the consequence
is not good. Our Saviour then forgave him; and at his comming againe in
Glory, will remember to raise him againe to Life Eternall.

The Eight is Acts 2. 24. where St. Peter saith of Christ, "that God
had raised him up, and loosed the Paines of Death, because it was not
possible he should be holden of it;" Which hee interprets to bee a
descent of Christ into Purgatory, to loose some Soules there from their
torments; whereas it is manifest, that it was Christ that was loosed;
it was hee that could not bee holden of Death, or the Grave; and not the
Souls in Purgatory. But if that which Beza sayes in his notes on this
place be well observed, there is none that will not see, that in stead
of Paynes, it should be Bands; and then there is no further cause to
seek for Purgatory in this Text.



CHAPTER XLV. OF DAEMONOLOGY, AND OTHER RELIQUES OF THE RELIGION OF THE
GENTILES




The Originall Of Daemonology

The impression made on the organs of Sight, by lucide Bodies, either in
one direct line, or in many lines, reflected from Opaque, or refracted
in the passage through Diaphanous Bodies, produceth in living Creatures,
in whom God hath placed such Organs, an Imagination of the Object, from
whence the Impression proceedeth; which Imagination is called Sight; and
seemeth not to bee a meer Imagination, but the Body it selfe without
us; in the same manner, as when a man violently presseth his eye, there
appears to him a light without, and before him, which no man perceiveth
but himselfe; because there is indeed no such thing without him, but
onely a motion in the interiour organs, pressing by resistance
outward, that makes him think so. And the motion made by this pressure,
continuing after the object which caused it is removed, is that we call
Imagination, and Memory, and (in sleep, and sometimes in great distemper
of the organs by Sicknesse, or Violence) a Dream: of which things I have
already spoken briefly, in the second and third Chapters.

This nature of Sight having never been discovered by the ancient
pretenders to Naturall Knowledge; much lesse by those that consider not
things so remote (as that Knowledge is) from their present use; it was
hard for men to conceive of those Images in the Fancy, and in the Sense,
otherwise, than of things really without us: Which some (because they
vanish away, they know not whither, nor how,) will have to be absolutely
Incorporeall, that is to say Immateriall, of Formes without Matter;
Colour and Figure, without any coloured or figured Body; and that they
can put on Aiery bodies (as a garment) to make them Visible when
they will to our bodily Eyes; and others say, are Bodies, and living
Creatures, but made of Air, or other more subtile and aethereall Matter,
which is, then, when they will be seen, condensed. But Both of them
agree on one generall appellation of them, DAEMONS. As if the Dead of
whom they Dreamed, were not Inhabitants of their own Brain, but of the
Air, or of Heaven, or Hell; not Phantasmes, but Ghosts; with just
as much reason, as if one should say, he saw his own Ghost in a
Looking-Glasse, or the Ghosts of the Stars in a River; or call the
ordinary apparition of the Sun, of the quantity of about a foot, the
Daemon, or Ghost of that great Sun that enlighteneth the whole visible
world: And by that means have feared them, as things of an unknown, that
is, of an unlimited power to doe them good, or harme; and consequently,
given occasion to the Governours of the Heathen Common-wealths to
regulate this their fear, by establishing that DAEMONOLOGY (in which
the Poets, as Principal Priests of the Heathen Religion, were specially
employed, or reverenced) to the Publique Peace, and to the Obedience of
Subjects necessary thereunto; and to make some of them Good Daemons,
and others Evill; the one as a Spurre to the Observance, the other, as
Reines to withhold them from Violation of the Laws.




What Were The Daemons Of The Ancients

What kind of things they were, to whom they attributed the name of
Daemons, appeareth partly in the Genealogie of their Gods, written by
Hesiod, one of the most ancient Poets of the Graecians; and partly in
other Histories; of which I have observed some few before, in the 12.
Chapter of this discourse.




How That Doctrine Was Spread

The Graecians, by their Colonies and Conquests, communicated their
Language and Writings into Asia, Egypt, and Italy; and therein, by
necessary consequence their Daemonology, or (as St. Paul calles it)
"their Doctrines of Devils;" And by that meanes, the contagion was
derived also to the Jewes, both of Judaea, and Alexandria, and other
parts, whereinto they were dispersed. But the name of Daemon they did
not (as the Graecians) attribute to Spirits both Good, and Evill; but
to the Evill onely: And to the Good Daemons they gave the name of the
Spirit of God; and esteemed those into whose bodies they entred to be
Prophets. In summe, all singularity if Good, they attributed to the
Spirit of God; and if Evill, to some Daemon, but a kakodaimen, an Evill
Daemon, that is, a Devill. And therefore, they called Daemoniaques, that
is, possessed by the Devill, such as we call Madmen or Lunatiques; or
such as had the Falling Sicknesse; or that spoke any thing, which they
for want of understanding, thought absurd: As also of an Unclean person
in a notorious degree, they used to say he had an Unclean Spirit; of a
Dumbe man, that he had a Dumbe Devill; and of John Baptist (Math. 11.
18.) for the singularity of his fasting, that he had a Devill; and of
our Saviour, because he said, hee that keepeth his sayings should not
see Death In Aeternum, (John 8. 52.) "Now we know thou hast a Devill;
Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are dead:" And again, because he said
(John 7. 20.) "They went about to kill him," the people answered, "Thou
hast a Devill, who goeth about to kill thee?" Whereby it is manifest,
that the Jewes had the same opinions concerning Phantasmes, namely, that
they were not Phantasmes that is, Idols of the braine, but things reall,
and independent on the Fancy.




Why Our Saviour Controlled It Not

Which doctrine if it be not true, why (may some say) did not our Saviour
contradict it, and teach the Contrary? nay why does he use on diverse
occasions, such forms of speech as seem to confirm it? To this I answer,
that first, where Christ saith, "A Spirit hath not flesh and bone,"
though hee shew that there be Spirits, yet he denies not that they are
Bodies: And where St. Paul sais, "We shall rise Spirituall Bodies," he
acknowledgeth the nature of Spirits, but that they are Bodily Spirits;
which is not difficult to understand. For Air and many other things
are Bodies, though not Flesh and Bone, or any other grosse body, to bee
discerned by the eye. But when our Saviour speaketh to the Devill, and
commandeth him to go out of a man, if by the Devill, be meant a Disease,
as Phrenesy, or Lunacy, or a corporeal Spirit, is not the speech
improper? can Diseases heare? or can there be a corporeall Spirit in a
Body of Flesh and Bone, full already of vitall and animall Spirits?
Are there not therefore Spirits, that neither have Bodies, nor are meer
Imaginations? To the first I answer, that the addressing of our Saviours
command to the Madnesse, or Lunacy he cureth, is no more improper, then
was his rebuking of the Fever, or of the Wind, and Sea; for neither
do these hear: Or than was the command of God, to the Light, to the
Firmament, to the Sunne, and Starres, when he commanded them to bee; for
they could not heare before they had a beeing. But those speeches are
not improper, because they signifie the power of Gods Word: no more
therefore is it improper, to command Madnesse, or Lunacy (under the
appellation of Devils, by which they were then commonly understood,)
to depart out of a mans body. To the second, concerning their being
Incorporeall, I have not yet observed any place of Scripture, from
whence it can be gathered, that any man was ever possessed with any
other Corporeal Spirit, but that of his owne, by which his body is
naturally moved.




The Scriptures Doe Not Teach That Spirits Are Incorporeall

Our Saviour, immediately after the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the
form of a Dove, is said by St. Matthew (Chapt. 4. 1.) to have been "led
up by the Spirit into the Wildernesse;" and the same is recited (Luke 4.
1.) in these words, "Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, was led in
the Spirit into the Wildernesse;" Whereby it is evident, that by
Spirit there, is meant the Holy Ghost. This cannot be interpreted for
a Possession: For Christ, and the Holy Ghost, are but one and the same
substance; which is no possession of one substance, or body, by another.
And whereas in the verses following, he is said "to have been taken
up by the Devill into the Holy City, and set upon a pinnacle of the
Temple," shall we conclude thence that hee was possessed of the Devill,
or carryed thither by violence? And again, "carryed thence by the Devill
into an exceeding high mountain, who shewed him them thence all the
Kingdomes of the world:" herein, wee are not to beleeve he was either
possessed, or forced by the Devill; nor that any Mountaine is high
enough, (according to the literall sense,) to shew him one whole
Hemisphere. What then can be the meaning of this place, other than that
he went of himself into the Wildernesse; and that this carrying of him
up and down, from the Wildernesse to the City, and from thence into a
Mountain, was a Vision? Conformable whereunto, is also the phrase of St.
Luke, that hee was led into the Wildernesse, not By, but In the Spirit:
whereas concerning His being Taken up into the Mountaine, and unto the
Pinnacle of the Temple, hee speaketh as St. Matthew doth. Which suiteth
with the nature of a Vision.

Again, where St. Luke sayes of Judas Iscariot, that "Satan entred into
him, and thereupon that he went and communed with the Chief Priests, and
Captaines, how he might betray Christ unto them:" it may be answered,
that by the Entring of Satan (that is the Enemy) into him, is meant, the
hostile and traiterous intention of selling his Lord and Master. For as
by the Holy Ghost, is frequently in Scripture understood, the Graces and
good Inclinations given by the Holy Ghost; so by the Entring of
Satan, may bee understood the wicked Cogitations, and Designes of the
Adversaries of Christ, and his Disciples. For as it is hard to say,
that the Devill was entred into Judas, before he had any such hostile
designe; so it is impertinent to say, he was first Christs Enemy in his
heart, and that the Devill entred into him afterwards. Therefore the
Entring of Satan, and his Wicked Purpose, was one and the same thing.

But if there be no Immateriall Spirit, nor any Possession of mens bodies
by any Spirit Corporeall, it may again be asked, why our Saviour and his
Apostles did not teach the People so; and in such cleer words, as they
might no more doubt thereof. But such questions as these, are more
curious, than necessary for a Christian mans Salvation. Men may as well
aske, why Christ that could have given to all men Faith, Piety, and all
manner of morall Vertues, gave it to some onely, and not to all: and
why he left the search of naturall Causes, and Sciences, to the naturall
Reason and Industry of men, and did not reveal it to all, or any man
supernaturally; and many other such questions: Of which neverthelesse
there may be alledged probable and pious reasons. For as God, when he
brought the Israelites into the Land of Promise, did not secure them
therein, by subduing all the Nations round about them; but left many of
them, as thornes in their sides, to awaken from time to time their
Piety and Industry: so our Saviour, in conducting us toward his heavenly
Kingdome, did not destroy all the difficulties of Naturall Questions;
but left them to exercise our Industry, and Reason; the Scope of
his preaching, being onely to shew us this plain and direct way to
Salvation, namely, the beleef of this Article, "that he was the Christ,
the Son of the living God, sent into the world to sacrifice himselfe for
our Sins, and at his comming again, gloriously to reign over his Elect,
and to save them from their Enemies eternally:" To which, the opinion
of Possession by Spirits, or Phantasmes, are no impediment in the way;
though it be to some an occasion of going out of the way, and to follow
their own Inventions. If wee require of the Scripture an account of all
questions, which may be raised to trouble us in the performance of Gods
commands; we may as well complaine of Moses for not having set downe the
time of the creation of such Spirits, as well as of the Creation of the
Earth, and Sea, and of Men, and Beasts. To conclude, I find in Scripture
that there be Angels, and Spirits, good and evill; but not that they are
Incorporeall, as are the Apparitions men see in the Dark, or in a Dream,
or Vision; which the Latines call Spectra, and took for Daemons. And I
find that there are Spirits Corporeal, (though subtile and Invisible;)
but not that any mans body was possessed, or inhabited by them; And that
the Bodies of the Saints shall be such, namely, Spirituall Bodies, as
St. Paul calls them.




The Power Of Casting Out Devills, Not The Same It Was In The Primitive
Church

Neverthelesse, the contrary Doctrine, namely, that there be Incorporeall
Spirits, hath hitherto so prevailed in the Church, that the use of
Exorcisme, (that is to say, of ejection of Devills by Conjuration) is
thereupon built; and (though rarely and faintly practised) is not yet
totally given over. That there were many Daemoniaques in the Primitive
Church, and few Mad-men, and other such singular diseases; whereas in
these times we hear of, and see many Mad-men, and few Daemoniaques,
proceeds not from the change of Nature; but of Names. But how it comes
to passe, that whereas heretofore the Apostles, and after them for a
time, the Pastors of the Church, did cure those singular Diseases, which
now they are not seen to doe; as likewise, why it is not in the power of
every true Beleever now, to doe all that the Faithfull did then, that is
to say, as we read (Mark 16. 17.) "In Christs name to cast out Devills,
to speak with new Tongues, to take up Serpents, to drink deadly Poison
without harm taking, and to cure the Sick by the laying on of their
hands," and all this without other words, but "in the Name of Jesus,"
is another question. And it is probable, that those extraordinary gifts
were given to the Church, for no longer a time, than men trusted wholly
to Christ, and looked for their felicity onely in his Kingdome to come;
and consequently, that when they sought Authority, and Riches, and
trusted to their own Subtilty for a Kingdome of this world, these
supernaturall gifts of God were again taken from them.




Another Relique Of Gentilisme, Worshipping Images, Left In The Church,
Not Brought Into It

Another relique of Gentilisme, is the Worship of Images, neither
instituted by Moses in the Old, nor by Christ in the New Testament; nor
yet brought in from the Gentiles; but left amongst them, after they had
given their names to Christ. Before our Saviour preached, it was the
generall Religion of the Gentiles, to worship for Gods, those Apparences
that remain in the Brain from the impression of externall Bodies upon
the organs of their Senses, which are commonly called Ideas, Idols,
Phantasmes, Conceits, as being Representations of those externall
Bodies, which cause them, and have nothing in them of reality, no more
than there is in the things that seem to stand before us in a Dream:
And this is the reason why St. Paul says, "Wee know that an Idol is
Nothing:" Not that he thought that an Image of Metall, Stone, or Wood,
was nothing; but that the thing which they honored, or feared in
the Image, and held for a God, was a meer Figment, without place,
habitation, motion, or existence, but in the motions of the Brain.
And the worship of these with Divine Honour, is that which is in the
Scripture called Idolatry, and Rebellion against God. For God being King
of the Jews, and his Lieutenant being first Moses, and afterward the
High Priest; if the people had been permitted to worship, and pray to
Images, (which are Representations of their own Fancies,) they had
had no farther dependence on the true God, of whom there can be no
similitude; nor on his prime Ministers, Moses, and the High Priests;
but every man had governed himself according to his own appetite, to the
utter eversion of the Common-wealth, and their own destruction for want
of Union. And therefore the first Law of God was, "They should not take
for Gods, ALIENOS DEOS, that is, the Gods of other nations, but that
onely true God, who vouchsafed to commune with Moses, and by him to give
them laws and directions, for their peace, and for their salvation
from their enemies." And the second was, that "they should not make to
themselves any Image to Worship, of their own Invention." For it is the
same deposing of a King, to submit to another King, whether he be set up
by a neighbour nation, or by our selves.




Answer To Certain Seeming Texts For Images

The places of Scripture pretended to countenance the setting up of
Images, to worship them; or to set them up at all in the places where
God is worshipped, are First, two Examples; one of the Cherubins over
the Ark of God; the other of the Brazen Serpent: Secondly, some texts
whereby we are commanded to worship certain Creatures for their relation
to God; as to worship his Footstool: And lastly, some other texts, by
which is authorized, a religious honoring of Holy things. But before I
examine the force of those places, to prove that which is pretended, I
must first explain what is to be understood by Worshipping, and what by
Images, and Idols.




What Is Worship

I have already shewn in the 20 Chapter of this Discourse, that to Honor,
is to value highly the Power of any person: and that such value is
measured, by our comparing him with others. But because there is nothing
to be compared with God in Power; we Honor him not but Dishonour him
by any Value lesse than Infinite. And thus Honor is properly of its own
nature, secret, and internall in the heart. But the inward thoughts of
men, which appeare outwardly in their words and actions, are the signes
of our Honoring, and these goe by the name of WORSHIP, in Latine,
CULTUS. Therefore, to Pray to, to Swear by, to Obey, to bee Diligent,
and Officious in Serving: in summe, all words and actions that betoken
Fear to Offend, or Desire to Please, is Worship, whether those words
and actions be sincere, or feigned: and because they appear as signes of
Honoring, are ordinarily also called Honor.




Distinction Between Divine And Civill Worship

The Worship we exhibite to those we esteem to be but men, as to Kings,
and men in Authority, is Civill Worship: But the worship we exhibite
to that which we think to bee God, whatsoever the words, ceremonies,
gestures, or other actions be, is Divine Worship. To fall prostrate
before a King, in him that thinks him but a Man, is but Civill Worship:
And he that but putteth off his hat in the Church, for this cause, that
he thinketh it the House of God, worshippeth with Divine Worship. They
that seek the distinction of Divine and Civill Worship, not in the
intention of the Worshipper, but in the Words douleia, and latreia,
deceive themselves. For whereas there be two sorts of Servants; that
sort, which is of those that are absolutely in the power of their
Masters, as Slaves taken in war, and their Issue, whose bodies are not
in their own power, (their lives depending on the Will of their Masters,
in such manner as to forfeit them upon the least disobedience,) and that
are bought and sold as Beasts, were called Douloi, that is properly,
Slaves, and their Service, Douleia: The other, which is of those that
serve (for hire, or in hope of benefit from their Masters) voluntarily;
are called Thetes; that is, Domestique Servants; to whose service the
Masters have no further right, than is contained in the Covenants made
betwixt them. These two kinds of Servants have thus much common to them
both, that their labour is appointed them by another, whether, as a
Slave, or a voluntary Servant: And the word Latris, is the general name
of both, signifying him that worketh for another, whether, as a Slave,
or a voluntary Servant: So that Latreia signifieth generally all
Service; but Douleia the service of Bondmen onely, and the condition of
Slavery: And both are used in Scripture (to signifie our Service of God)
promiscuously. Douleia, because we are Gods Slaves; Latreia, because
wee Serve him: and in all kinds of Service is contained, not onely
Obedience, but also Worship, that is, such actions, gestures, and words,
as signifie Honor.




An Image What Phantasmes

An IMAGE (in the most strict signification of the word) is the
Resemblance of some thing visible: In which sense the Phantasticall
Formes, Apparitions, or Seemings of Visible Bodies to the Sight, are
onely Images; such as are the Shew of a man, or other thing in the
Water, by Reflexion, or Refraction; or of the Sun, or Stars by Direct
Vision in the Air; which are nothing reall in the things seen, nor in
the place where thy seem to bee; nor are their magnitudes and figures
the same with that of the object; but changeable, by the variation of
the organs of Sight, or by glasses; and are present oftentimes in our
Imagination, and in our Dreams, when the object is absent; or changed
into other colours, and shapes, as things that depend onely upon the
Fancy. And these are the Images which are originally and most properly
called Ideas, and IDOLS, and derived from the language of the Graecians,
with whom the word Eido signifieth to See. They are also called
PHANTASMES, which is in the same language, Apparitions. And from these
Images it is that one of the faculties of mans Nature, is called the
Imagination. And from hence it is manifest, that there neither is, nor
can bee any Image made of a thing Invisible.

It is also evident, that there can be no Image of a thing Infinite: for
all the Images, and Phantasmes that are made by the Impression of things
visible, are figured: but Figure is a quantity every way determined: And
therefore there can bee no Image of God: nor of the Soule of Man; nor of
Spirits, but onely of Bodies Visible, that is, Bodies that have light in
themselves, or are by such enlightened.




Fictions; Materiall Images

And whereas a man can fancy Shapes he never saw; making up a Figure out
of the parts of divers creatures; as the Poets make their Centaures,
Chimaeras, and other Monsters never seen: So can he also give Matter to
those Shapes, and make them in Wood, Clay or Metall. And these are also
called Images, not for the resemblance of any corporeall thing, but for
the resemblance of some Phantasticall Inhabitants of the Brain of the
Maker. But in these Idols, as they are originally in the Brain, and
as they are painted, carved, moulded, or moulten in matter, there is a
similitude of the one to the other, for which the Materiall Body made
by Art, may be said to be the Image of the Phantasticall Idoll made by
Nature.

But in a larger use of the word Image, is contained also, any
Representation of one thing by another. So an earthly Soveraign may be
called the Image of God: And an inferiour Magistrate the Image of an
earthly Soveraign. And many times in the Idolatry of the Gentiles there
was little regard to the similitude of their Materiall Idoll to the
Idol in their fancy, and yet it was called the Image of it. For a
Stone unhewn has been set up for Neptune, and divers other shapes far
different from the shapes they conceived of their Gods. And at this
day we see many Images of the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, unlike one
another, and without correspondence to any one mans Fancy; and yet serve
well enough for the purpose they were erected for; which was no more but
by the Names onely, to represent the Persons mentioned in the History;
to which every man applyeth a Mentall Image of his owne making, or
none at all. And thus an Image in the largest sense, is either the
Resemblance, or the Representation of some thing Visible; or both
together, as it happeneth for the most part.

But the name of Idoll is extended yet further in Scripture, to
signifie also the Sunne, or a Starre, or any other Creature, visible or
invisible, when they are worshipped for Gods.




Idolatry What

Having shewn what is Worship, and what an Image; I will now put them
together, and examine what that IDOLATRY is, which is forbidden in the
Second Commandement, and other places of the Scripture.

To worship an Image, is voluntarily to doe those externall acts, which
are signes of honoring either the matter of the Image, which is Wood,
Stone, or Metall, or some other visible creature; or the Phantasme of
the brain, for the resemblance, or representation whereof, the matter
was formed and figured; or both together, as one animate Body, composed
of the Matter and the Phantasme, as of a Body and Soule.

To be uncovered, before a man of Power and Authority, or before the
Throne of a Prince, or in such other places as hee ordaineth to that
purpose in his absence, is to Worship that man, or Prince with Civill
Worship; as being a signe, not of honoring the stoole, or place, but the
Person; and is not Idolatry. But if hee that doth it, should suppose the
Soule of the Prince to be in the Stool, or should present a Petition to
the Stool, it were Divine Worship, and Idolatry.

To pray to a King for such things, as hee is able to doe for us, though
we prostrate our selves before him, is but Civill Worship; because we
acknowledge no other power in him, but humane: But voluntarily to pray
unto him for fair weather, or for any thing which God onely can doe
for us, is Divine Worship, and Idolatry. On the other side, if a King
compell a man to it by the terrour of Death, or other great corporall
punishment, it is not Idolatry: For the Worship which the Soveraign
commandeth to bee done unto himself by the terrour of his Laws, is not
a sign that he that obeyeth him, does inwardly honour him as a God, but
that he is desirous to save himselfe from death, or from a miserable
life; and that which is not a sign of internall honor, is no Worship;
and therefore no Idolatry. Neither can it bee said, that hee that does
it, scandalizeth, or layeth any stumbling block before his Brother;
because how wise, or learned soever he be that worshippeth in that
manner, another man cannot from thence argue, that he approveth it; but
that he doth it for fear; and that it is not his act, but the act of the
Soveraign.

To worship God, in some peculiar Place, or turning a mans face towards
an Image, or determinate Place, is not to worship, or honor the Place,
or Image; but to acknowledge it Holy, that is to say, to acknowledge
the Image, or the Place to be set apart from common use: for that is the
meaning of the word Holy; which implies no new quality in the Place, or
Image; but onely a new Relation by Appropriation to God; and therefore
is not Idolatry; no more than it was Idolatry to worship God before
the Brazen Serpent; or for the Jews when they were out of their owne
countrey, to turn their faces (when they prayed) toward the Temple of
Jerusalem; or for Moses to put off his Shoes when he was before the
Flaming Bush, the ground appertaining to Mount Sinai; which place God
had chosen to appear in, and to give his Laws to the People of Israel,
and was therefore Holy ground, not by inhaerent sanctity, but by
separation to Gods use; or for Christians to worship in the Churches,
which are once solemnly dedicated to God for that purpose, by the
Authority of the King, or other true Representant of the Church. But to
worship God, is inanimating, or inhibiting, such Image, or place; that
is to say, an infinite substance in a finite place, is Idolatry: for
such finite Gods, are but Idols of the brain, nothing reall; and are
commonly called in the Scripture by the names of Vanity, and Lyes, and
Nothing. Also to worship God, not as inanimating, or present in the
place, or Image; but to the end to be put in mind of him, or of some
works of his, in case the Place, or Image be dedicated, or set up
by private authority, and not by the authority of them that are our
Soveraign Pastors, is Idolatry. For the Commandement is, "Thou shalt not
make to thy selfe any graven image." God commanded Moses to set up the
Brazen Serpent; hee did not make it to himselfe; it was not therefore
against the Commandement. But the making of the Golden Calfe by Aaron,
and the People, as being done without authority from God, was Idolatry;
not onely because they held it for God, but also because they made it
for a Religious use, without warrant either from God their Soveraign, or
from Moses, that was his Lieutenant.

The Gentiles worshipped for Gods, Jupiter, and others; that living, were
men perhaps that had done great and glorious Acts; and for the Children
of God, divers men and women, supposing them gotten between an Immortall
Deity, and a mortall man. This was Idolatry, because they made them so
to themselves, having no authority from God, neither in his eternall Law
of Reason, nor in his positive and revealed Will. But though our Saviour
was a man, whom wee also beleeve to bee God Immortall, and the Son of
God; yet this is no Idolatry; because wee build not that beleef upon
our own fancy, or judgment, but upon the Word of God revealed in the
Scriptures. And for the adoration of the Eucharist, if the words of
Christ, "This is my Body," signifie, "that he himselfe, and the seeming
bread in his hand; and not onely so, but that all the seeming morsells
of bread that have ever since been, and any time hereafter shall bee
consecrated by Priests, bee so many Christs bodies, and yet all of them
but one body," then is that no Idolatry, because it is authorized by our
Saviour: but if that text doe not signifie that, (for there is no other
that can be alledged for it,) then, because it is a worship of humane
institution, it is Idolatry. For it is not enough to say, God can
transubstantiate the Bread into Christs Body: For the Gentiles also held
God to be Omnipotent; and might upon that ground no lesse excuse their
Idolatry, by pretending, as well as others, as transubstantiation of
their Wood, and Stone into God Almighty.

Whereas there be, that pretend Divine Inspiration, to be a supernaturall
entring of the Holy Ghost into a man, and not an acquisition of Gods
grace, by doctrine, and study; I think they are in a very dangerous
Dilemma. For if they worship not the men whom they beleeve to be so
inspired, they fall into Impiety; as not adoring Gods supernaturall
Presence. And again, if they worship them, they commit Idolatry; for the
Apostles would never permit themselves to be so worshipped. Therefore
the safest way is to beleeve, that by the Descending of the Dove upon
the Apostles; and by Christs Breathing on them, when hee gave them
the Holy Ghost; and by the giving of it by Imposition of Hands, are
understood the signes which God hath been pleased to use, or ordain to
be used, of his promise to assist those persons in their study to
Preach his Kingdome, and in their Conversation, that it might not be
Scandalous, but Edifying to others.




Scandalous Worship Of Images

Besides the Idolatrous Worship of Images, there is also a Scandalous
Worship of them; which is also a sin; but not Idolatry. For Idolatry is
to worship by signes of an internall, and reall honour: but Scandalous
Worship, is but Seeming Worship; and may sometimes bee joined with
an inward, and hearty detestation, both of the Image, and of the
Phantasticall Daemon, or Idol, to which it is dedicated; and proceed
onely from the fear of death, or other grievous punishment; and is
neverthelesse a sin in them that so worship, in case they be men whose
actions are looked at by others, as lights to guide them by; because
following their ways, they cannot but stumble, and fall in the way of
Religion: Whereas the example of those we regard not, works not on us
at all, but leaves us to our own diligence and caution; and consequently
are no causes of our falling.

If therefore a Pastor lawfully called to teach and direct others, or any
other, of whose knowledge there is a great opinion, doe externall honor
to an Idol for fear; unlesse he make his feare, and unwillingnesse to
it, as evident as the worship; he Scandalizeth his Brother, by seeming
to approve Idolatry. For his Brother, arguing from the action of his
teacher, or of him whose knowledge he esteemeth great, concludes it
to bee lawfull in it selfe. And this Scandall, is Sin, and a Scandall
given. But if one being no Pastor, nor of eminent reputation for
knowledge in Christian Doctrine, doe the same, and another follow him;
this is no Scandall given; for he had no cause to follow such example:
but is a pretence of Scandall which hee taketh of himselfe for an excuse
before men: For an unlearned man, that is in the power of an idolatrous
King, or State, if commanded on pain of death to worship before an
Idoll, hee detesteth the Idoll in his heart, hee doth well; though if he
had the fortitude to suffer death, rather than worship it, he should
doe better. But if a Pastor, who as Christs Messenger, has undertaken to
teach Christs Doctrine to all nations, should doe the same, it were
not onely a sinfull Scandall, in respect of other Christian mens
consciences, but a perfidious forsaking of his charge.

The summe of that which I have said hitherto, concerning the Worship of
Images, is that, that he that worshippeth in an Image, or any Creature,
either the Matter thereof, or any Fancy of his own, which he thinketh
to dwell in it; or both together; or beleeveth that such things hear
his Prayers, or see his Devotions, without Ears, or Eyes, committeth
Idolatry: and he that counterfeiteth such Worship for fear of
punishment, if he bee a man whose example hath power amongst his
Brethren, committeth a sin: But he that worshippeth the Creator of the
world before such an Image, or in such a place as he hath not made, or
chosen of himselfe, but taken from the commandement of Gods Word, as the
Jewes did in worshipping God before the Cherubins, and before the Brazen
Serpent for a time, and in, or towards the Temple of Jerusalem, which
was also but for a time, committeth not Idolatry.

Now for the Worship of Saints, and Images, and Reliques, and other
things at this day practised in the Church of Rome, I say they are not
allowed by the Word of God, not brought into the Church of Rome, from
the Doctrine there taught; but partly left in it at the first conversion
of the Gentiles; and afterwards countenanced, and confirmed, and
augmented by the Bishops of Rome.




Answer To The Argument From The Cherubins, And Brazen Serpent

As for the proofs alledged out of Scripture, namely, those examples
of Images appointed by God to bee set up; They were not set up for the
people, or any man to worship; but that they should worship God himselfe
before them: as before the Cherubins over the Ark, and the Brazen
Serpent. For we read not, that the Priest, or any other did worship the
Cherubins; but contrarily wee read (2 Kings 18.4.) that Hezekiah brake
in pieces the Brazen Serpent which Moses had set up, because the
People burnt incense to it. Besides, those examples are not put for
our Imitation, that we also should set up Images, under pretence
of worshipping God before them; because the words of the second
Commandement, "Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any graven Image, &c."
distinguish between the Images that God commanded to be set up, and
those which wee set up to our selves. And therefore from the Cherubins,
or Brazen Serpent, to the Images of mans devising; and from the Worship
commanded by God, to the Will-Worship of men, the argument is not good.
This also is to bee considered, that as Hezekiah brake in pieces the
Brazen Serpent, because the Jews did worship it, to the end they should
doe so no more; so also Christian Soveraigns ought to break down the
Images which their Subjects have been accustomed to worship; that there
be no more occasion of such Idolatry. For at this day, the ignorant
People, where Images are worshipped, doe really beleeve there is a
Divine Power in the Images; and are told by their Pastors, that some
of them have spoken; and have bled; and that miracles have been done by
them; which they apprehend as done by the Saint, which they think either
is the Image it self, or in it. The Israelites, when they worshipped the
Calfe, did think they worshipped the God that brought them out of Egypt;
and yet it was Idolatry, because they thought the Calfe either was
that God, or had him in his belly. And though some man may think it
impossible for people to be so stupid, as to think the Image to be
God, or a Saint; or to worship it in that notion; yet it is manifest
in Scripture to the contrary; where when the Golden Calfe was made, the
people said, (Exod. 32. 2.) "These are thy Gods O Israel;" and where the
Images of Laban (Gen. 31.30.) are called his Gods. And wee see daily by
experience in all sorts of People, that such men as study nothing but
their food and ease, are content to beleeve any absurdity, rather than
to trouble themselves to examine it; holding their faith as it were by
entaile unalienable, except by an expresse and new Law.




Painting Of Fancies No Idolatry: Abusing Them To Religious Worship Is

But they inferre from some other places, that it is lawfull to paint
Angels, and also God himselfe: as from Gods walking in the Garden; from
Jacobs seeing God at the top of the ladder; and from other Visions, and
Dreams. But Visions, and Dreams whether naturall, or supernaturall, are
but Phantasmes: and he that painteth an Image of any of them, maketh not
an Image of God, but of his own Phantasm, which is, making of an Idol. I
say not, that to draw a Picture after a fancy, is a Sin; but when it
is drawn, to hold it for a Representation of God, is against the second
Commandement; and can be of no use, but to worship. And the same may be
said of the Images of Angels, and of men dead; unlesse as Monuments of
friends, or of men worthy remembrance: For such use of an Image, is not
Worship of the Image; but a civill honoring of the Person, not that is,
but that was: But when it is done to the Image which we make of a Saint,
for no other reason, but that we think he heareth our prayers, and is
pleased with the honour wee doe him, when dead, and without sense, wee
attribute to him more than humane power; and therefore it is Idolatry.

Seeing therefore there is no authority, neither in the Law of Moses,
nor in the Gospel, for the religious Worship of Images, or other
Representations of God, which men set up to themselves; or for the
Worship of the Image of any Creature in Heaven, or Earth, or under the
Earth: And whereas Christian Kings, who are living Representants of God,
are not to be worshipped by their Subjects, by any act, that signifieth
a greater esteem of his power, than the nature of mortall man is capable
of; It cannot be imagined, that the Religious Worship now in use,
was brought into the Church, by misunderstanding of the Scripture. It
resteth therefore, that it was left in it, by not destroying the Images
themselves, in the conversion of the Gentiles that worshipped them.




How Idolatry Was Left In The Church

The cause whereof, was the immoderate esteem, and prices set upon the
workmanship of them, which made the owners (though converted, from
worshipping them as they had done Religiously for Daemons) to retain
them still in their houses, upon pretence of doing it in the honor of
Christ, of the Virgin Mary, and of the Apostles, and other the Pastors
of the Primitive Church; as being easie, by giving them new names, to
make that an Image of the Virgin Mary, and of her Sonne our Saviour,
which before perhaps was called the Image of Venus, and Cupid; and so of
a Jupiter to make a Barnabas, and of Mercury a Paul, and the like. And
as worldly ambition creeping by degrees into the Pastors, drew them to
an endeavour of pleasing the new made Christians; and also to a liking
of this kind of honour, which they also might hope for after their
decease, as well as those that had already gained it: so the worshipping
of the Images of Christ and his Apostles, grow more and more Idolatrous;
save that somewhat after the time of Constantine, divers Emperors, and
Bishops, and generall Councells observed, and opposed the unlawfulnesse
thereof; but too late, or too weakly.




Canonizing Of Saints

The Canonizing of Saints, is another Relique of Gentilisme: It is
neither a misunderstanding of Scripture, nor a new invention of the
Roman Church, but a custome as ancient as the Common-wealth of Rome it
self. The first that ever was canonized at Rome, was Romulus, and that
upon the narration of Julius Proculus, that swore before the Senate,
he spake with him after his death, and was assured by him, he dwelt in
Heaven, and was there called Quirinius, and would be propitious to
the State of their new City: And thereupon the Senate gave Publique
Testimony of his Sanctity. Julius Caesar, and other Emperors after him,
had the like Testimony; that is, were Canonized for Saints; now defined;
and is the same with the Apotheosis of the Heathen.




The Name Of Pontifex

It is also from the Roman Heathen, that the Popes have received the
name, and power of PONTIFEX MAXIMUS. This was the name of him that in
the ancient Common-wealth of Rome, had the Supreme Authority under
the Senate and People, of regulating all Ceremonies, and Doctrines
concerning their Religion: And when Augustus Caesar changed the State
into a Monarchy, he took to himselfe no more but this office, and that
of Tribune of the People, (than is to say, the Supreme Power both in
State, and Religion;) and the succeeding Emperors enjoyed the same. But
when the Emperour Constantine lived, who was the first that professed
and authorized Christian Religion, it was consonant to his profession,
to cause Religion to be regulated (under his authority) by the Bishop
of Rome: Though it doe not appear they had so soon the name of Pontifex;
but rather, that the succeeding Bishops took it of themselves, to
countenance the power they exercised over the Bishops of the Roman
Provinces. For it is not any Priviledge of St. Peter, but the Priviledge
of the City of Rome, which the Emperors were alwaies willing to uphold;
that gave them such authority over other Bishops; as may be evidently
seen by that, that the Bishop of Constantinople, when the Emperour made
that City the Seat of the Empire, pretended to bee equall to the Bishop
of Rome; though at last, not without contention, the Pope carryed it,
and became the Pontifex Maximus; but in right onely of the Emperour; and
not without the bounds of the Empire; nor any where, after the Emperour
had lost his power in Rome; though it were the Pope himself that took
his power from him. From whence wee may by the way observe, that there
is no place for the superiority of the Pope over other Bishops, except
in the territories whereof he is himself the Civill Soveraign; and where
the Emperour having Soveraign Power Civill, hath expressely chosen the
Pope for the chief Pastor under himselfe, of his Christian Subjects.




Procession Of Images

The carrying about of Images in Procession, is another Relique of the
Religion of the Greeks, and Romans: For they also carried their
Idols from place to place, in a kind of Chariot, which was peculiarly
dedicated to that use, which the Latines called Thensa, and Vehiculum
Deorum; and the Image was placed in a frame, or Shrine, which they
called Ferculum: And that which they called Pompa, is the same that
now is named Procession: According whereunto, amongst the Divine Honors
which were given to Julius Caesar by the Senate, this was one, that in
the Pompe (or Procession) at the Circaean games, he should have Thensam
& Ferculum, a sacred Chariot, and a Shrine; which was as much, as to be
carried up and down as a God: Just as at this day the Popes are carried
by Switzers under a Canopie.




Wax Candles, And Torches Lighted

To these Processions also belonged the bearing of burning Torches, and
Candles, before the Images of the Gods, both amongst the Greeks, and
Romans. For afterwards the Emperors of Rome received the same honor; as
we read of Caligula, that at his reception to the Empire, he was carried
from Misenum to Rome, in the midst of a throng of People, the wayes
beset with Altars, and Beasts for Sacrifice, and burning Torches: And
of Caracalla that was received into Alexandria with Incense, and with
casting of Flowers, and Dadouchiais, that is, with Torches; for Dadochoi
were they that amongst the Greeks carried Torches lighted in the
Processions of their Gods: And in processe of time, the devout, but
ignorant People, did many times honor their Bishops with the like
pompe of Wax Candles, and the Images of our Saviour, and the Saints,
constantly, in the Church it self. And thus came in the use of Wax
Candles; and was also established by some of the ancient Councells.

The Heathens had also their Aqua Lustralis, that is to say, Holy Water.
The Church of Rome imitates them also in their Holy Dayes. They had
their Bacchanalia; and we have our Wakes, answering to them: They
their Saturnalia, and we our Carnevalls, and Shrove-tuesdays liberty
of Servants: They their Procession of Priapus; wee our fetching in,
erection, and dancing about May-poles; and Dancing is one kind of
Worship: They had their Procession called Ambarvalia; and we our
Procession about the fields in the Rogation Week. Nor do I think that
these are all the Ceremonies that have been left in the Church, from the
first conversion of the Gentiles: but they are all that I can for the
present call to mind; and if a man would wel observe that which is
delivered in the Histories, concerning the Religious Rites of the Greeks
and Romanes, I doubt not but he might find many more of these old empty
Bottles of Gentilisme, which the Doctors of the Romane Church, either
by Negligence, or Ambition, have filled up again with the new Wine of
Christianity, that will not faile in time to break them.



CHAPTER XLVI. OF DARKNESSE FROM VAIN PHILOSOPHY, AND FABULOUS TRADITIONS




What Philosophy Is

By Philosophy is understood "the Knowledge acquired by Reasoning, from
the Manner of the Generation of any thing, to the Properties; or from
the Properties, to some possible Way of Generation of the same; to the
end to bee able to produce, as far as matter, and humane force permit,
such Effects, as humane life requireth." So the Geometrician, from the
Construction of Figures, findeth out many Properties thereof; and from
the Properties, new Ways of their Construction, by Reasoning; to the end
to be able to measure Land and Water; and for infinite other uses. So
the Astronomer, from the Rising, Setting, and Moving of the Sun, and
Starres, in divers parts of the Heavens, findeth out the Causes of Day,
and Night, and of the different Seasons of the Year; whereby he keepeth
an account of Time: And the like of other Sciences.




Prudence No Part Of Philosophy

By which Definition it is evident, that we are not to account as any
part thereof, that originall knowledge called Experience, in which
consisteth Prudence: Because it is not attained by Reasoning, but found
as well in Brute Beasts, as in Man; and is but a Memory of successions
of events in times past, wherein the omission of every little
circumstance altering the effect, frustrateth the expectation of the
most Prudent: whereas nothing is produced by Reasoning aright, but
generall, eternall, and immutable Truth.




No False Doctrine Is Part Of Philosophy

Nor are we therefore to give that name to any false Conclusions: For he
that Reasoneth aright in words he understandeth, can never conclude an
Error:



No More Is Revelation Supernaturall

Nor to that which any man knows by supernaturall Revelation; because it
is not acquired by Reasoning:




Nor Learning Taken Upon Credit Of Authors

Nor that which is gotten by Reasoning from the Authority of Books;
because it is not by Reasoning from the Cause to the Effect, nor from
the Effect to the Cause; and is not Knowledge, but Faith.




Of The Beginnings And Progresse Of Philosophy

The faculty of Reasoning being consequent to the use of Speech, it was
not possible, but that there should have been some generall Truthes
found out by Reasoning, as ancient almost as Language it selfe. The
Savages of America, are not without some good Morall Sentences; also
they have a little Arithmetick, to adde, and divide in Numbers not too
great: but they are not therefore Philosophers. For as there were Plants
of Corn and Wine in small quantity dispersed in the Fields and Woods,
before men knew their vertue, or made use of them for their nourishment,
or planted them apart in Fields, and Vineyards; in which time they
fed on Akorns, and drank Water: so also there have been divers true,
generall, and profitable Speculations from the beginning; as being the
naturall plants of humane Reason: But they were at first but few in
number; men lived upon grosse Experience; there was no Method; that is
to say, no Sowing, nor Planting of Knowledge by it self, apart from the
Weeds, and common Plants of Errour and Conjecture: And the cause of it
being the want of leasure from procuring the necessities of life, and
defending themselves against their neighbours, it was impossible, till
the erecting of great Common-wealths, it should be otherwise. Leasure
is the mother of Philosophy; and Common-wealth, the mother of Peace, and
Leasure: Where first were great and flourishing Cities, there was first
the study of Philosophy. The Gymnosophists of India, the Magi of Persia,
and the Priests of Chaldea and Egypt, are counted the most ancient
Philosophers; and those Countreys were the most ancient of Kingdomes.
Philosophy was not risen to the Graecians, and other people of the West,
whose Common-wealths (no greater perhaps then Lucca, or Geneva) had
never Peace, but when their fears of one another were equall; nor the
Leasure to observe any thing but one another. At length, when Warre had
united many of these Graecian lesser Cities, into fewer, and greater;
then began Seven Men, of severall parts of Greece, to get the reputation
of being Wise; some of them for Morall and Politique Sentences; and
others for the learning of the Chaldeans and Egyptians, which was
Astronomy, and Geometry. But we hear not yet of any Schools of
Philosophy.




Of The Schools Of Philosophy Amongst The Athenians

After the Athenians by the overthrow of the Persian Armies, had gotten
the Dominion of the Sea; and thereby, of all the Islands, and Maritime
Cities of the Archipelago, as well of Asia as Europe; and were grown
wealthy; they that had no employment, neither at home, nor abroad, had
little else to employ themselves in, but either (as St. Luke says, Acts
17.21.) "in telling and hearing news," or in discoursing of Philosophy
publiquely to the youth of the City. Every Master took some place for
that purpose. Plato in certaine publique Walks called Academia, from one
Academus: Aristotle in the Walk of the Temple of Pan, called Lycaeum:
others in the Stoa, or covered Walk, wherein the Merchants Goods were
brought to land: others in other places; where they spent the time of
their Leasure, in teaching or in disputing of their Opinions: and some
in any place, where they could get the youth of the City together to
hear them talk. And this was it which Carneades also did at Rome, when
he was Ambassadour: which caused Cato to advise the Senate to dispatch
him quickly, for feare of corrupting the manners of the young men that
delighted to hear him speak (as they thought) fine things.

From this it was, that the place where any of them taught, and disputed,
was called Schola, which in their Tongue signifieth Leasure; and their
Disputations, Diatribae, that is to say, Passing of The Time. Also the
Philosophers themselves had the name of their Sects, some of them from
these their Schools: For they that followed Plato’s Doctrine, were
called Academiques; The followers of Aristotle, Peripatetiques, from the
Walk hee taught in; and those that Zeno taught, Stoiques, from the Stoa:
as if we should denominate men from More-fields, from Pauls-Church, and
from the Exchange, because they meet there often, to prate and loyter.

Neverthelesse, men were so much taken with this custome, that in time
it spread it selfe over all Europe, and the best part of Afrique; so as
there were Schools publiquely erected, and maintained for Lectures, and
Disputations, almost in every Common-wealth.




Of The Schools Of The Jews

There were also Schools, anciently, both before, and after the time of
our Saviour, amongst the Jews: but they were Schools of their Law. For
though they were called Synagogues, that is to say, Congregations of the
People; yet in as much as the Law was every Sabbath day read, expounded,
and disputed in them, they differed not in nature, but in name onely
from Publique Schools; and were not onely in Jerusalem, but in every
City of the Gentiles, where the Jews inhabited. There was such a Schoole
at Damascus, whereinto Paul entred, to persecute. There were others at
Antioch, Iconium and Thessalonica, whereinto he entred, to dispute:
And such was the Synagogue of the Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians,
Cilicians, and those of Asia; that is to say, the Schoole of Libertines,
and of Jewes, that were strangers in Jerusalem: And of this Schoole they
were that disputed with Saint Steven.




The Schoole Of Graecians Unprofitable

But what has been the Utility of those Schools? what Science is there
at this day acquired by their Readings and Disputings? That wee have
of Geometry, which is the Mother of all Naturall Science, wee are not
indebted for it to the Schools. Plato that was the best Philosopher
of the Greeks, forbad entrance into his Schoole, to all that were not
already in some measure Geometricians. There were many that studied that
Science to the great advantage of mankind: but there is no mention of
their Schools; nor was there any Sect of Geometricians; nor did they
then passe under the name of Philosophers. The naturall Philosophy
of those Schools, was rather a Dream than Science, and set forth in
senselesse and insignificant Language; which cannot be avoided by
those that will teach Philosophy, without having first attained great
knowledge in Geometry: For Nature worketh by Motion; the Wayes,
and Degrees whereof cannot be known, without the knowledge of the
Proportions and Properties of Lines, and Figures. Their Morall
Philosophy is but a description of their own Passions. For the rule of
Manners, without Civill Government, is the Law of Nature; and in it,
the Law Civill; that determineth what is Honest, and Dishonest; what is
Just, and Unjust; and generally what is Good, and Evill: whereas they
make the Rules of Good, and Bad, by their own Liking, and Disliking: By
which means, in so great diversity of taste, there is nothing generally
agreed on; but every one doth (as far as he dares) whatsoever seemeth
good in his own eyes, to the subversion of Common-wealth. Their Logique
which should bee the Method of Reasoning, is nothing else but Captions
of Words, and Inventions how to puzzle such as should goe about to pose
them. To conclude there is nothing so absurd, that the old Philosophers
(as Cicero saith, who was one of them) have not some of them maintained.
And I beleeve that scarce any thing can be more absurdly said
in naturall Philosophy, than that which now is called Aristotles
Metaphysiques, nor more repugnant to Government, than much of that hee
hath said in his Politiques; nor more ignorantly, than a great part of
his Ethiques.




The Schools Of The Jews Unprofitable

The Schoole of the Jews, was originally a Schoole of the Law of Moses;
who commanded (Deut. 31.10.) that at the end of every seventh year, at
the Feast of the Tabernacles, it should be read to all the people, that
they might hear, and learn it: Therefore the reading of the Law (which
was in use after the Captivity) every Sabbath day, ought to have had
no other end, but the acquainting of the people with the Commandements
which they were to obey, and to expound unto them the writings of the
Prophets. But it is manifest, by the many reprehensions of them by
our Saviour, that they corrupted the Text of the Law with their
false Commentaries, and vain Traditions; and so little understood the
Prophets, that they did neither acknowledge Christ, nor the works he
did; for which the Prophets prophecyed. So that by their Lectures and
Disputations in their Synagogues, they turned the Doctrine of their Law
into a Phantasticall kind of Philosophy, concerning the incomprehensible
nature of God, and of Spirits; which they compounded of the Vain
Philosophy and Theology of the Graecians, mingled with their own
fancies, drawn from the obscurer places of the Scripture, and which
might most easily bee wrested to their purpose; and from the Fabulous
Traditions of their Ancestors.




University What It Is

That which is now called an University, is a Joyning together, and an
Incorporation under one Government of many Publique Schools, in one and
the same Town or City. In which, the principal Schools were ordained for
the three Professions, that is to say, of the Romane Religion, of the
Romane Law, and of the Art of Medicine. And for the study of Philosophy
it hath no otherwise place, then as a handmaid to the Romane Religion:
And since the Authority of Aristotle is onely current there, that
study is not properly Philosophy, (the nature whereof dependeth not on
Authors,) but Aristotelity. And for Geometry, till of very late times it
had no place at all; as being subservient to nothing but rigide Truth.
And if any man by the ingenuity of his owne nature, had attained to any
degree of perfection therein, hee was commonly thought a Magician, and
his Art Diabolicall.




Errors Brought Into Religion From Aristotles Metaphysiques

Now to descend to the particular Tenets of Vain Philosophy, derived to
the Universities, and thence into the Church, partly from Aristotle,
partly from Blindnesse of understanding; I shall first consider their
Principles. There is a certain Philosophia Prima, on which all other
Philosophy ought to depend; and consisteth principally, in right
limiting of the significations of such Appellations, or Names, as are
of all others the most Universall: Which Limitations serve to avoid
ambiguity, and aequivocation in Reasoning; and are commonly called
Definitions; such as are the Definitions of Body, Time, Place, Matter,
Forme, Essence, Subject, Substance, Accident, Power, Act, Finite,
Infinite, Quantity, Quality, Motion, Action, Passion, and divers others,
necessary to the explaining of a mans Conceptions concerning the Nature
and Generation of Bodies. The Explication (that is, the setling of the
meaning) of which, and the like Terms, is commonly in the Schools called
Metaphysiques; as being a part of the Philosophy of Aristotle, which
hath that for title: but it is in another sense; for there it signifieth
as much, as "Books written, or placed after his naturall Philosophy:"
But the Schools take them for Books Of Supernaturall Philosophy: for the
word Metaphysiques will bear both these senses. And indeed that which is
there written, is for the most part so far from the possibility of being
understood, and so repugnant to naturall Reason, that whosoever
thinketh there is any thing to bee understood by it, must needs think it
supernaturall.




Errors Concerning Abstract Essences

From these Metaphysiques, which are mingled with the Scripture to make
Schoole Divinity, wee are told, there be in the world certaine
Essences separated from Bodies, which they call Abstract Essences, and
Substantiall Formes: For the Interpreting of which Jargon, there is
need of somewhat more than ordinary attention in this place. Also I
ask pardon of those that are not used to this kind of Discourse, for
applying my selfe to those that are. The World, (I mean not the Earth
onely, that denominates the Lovers of it Worldly Men, but the Universe,
that is, the whole masse of all things that are) is Corporeall, that
is to say, Body; and hath the dimensions of Magnitude, namely, Length,
Bredth, and Depth: also every part of Body, is likewise Body, and hath
the like dimensions; and consequently every part of the Universe,
is Body, and that which is not Body, is no part of the Universe: And
because the Universe is all, that which is no part of it, is Nothing;
and consequently No Where. Nor does it follow from hence, that Spirits
are Nothing: for they have dimensions, and are therefore really Bodies;
though that name in common Speech be given to such Bodies onely, as are
visible, or palpable; that is, that have some degree of Opacity: But for
Spirits, they call them Incorporeall; which is a name of more honour,
and may therefore with more piety bee attributed to God himselfe; in
whom wee consider not what Attribute expresseth best his Nature, which
is Incomprehensible; but what best expresseth our desire to honour him.

To know now upon what grounds they say there be Essences Abstract, or
Substantiall Formes, wee are to consider what those words do properly
signifie. The use of Words, is to register to our selves, and make
manifest to others the Thoughts and Conceptions of our Minds. Of which
Words, some are the names of the Things conceived; as the names of all
sorts of Bodies, that work upon the Senses, and leave an Impression in
the Imagination: Others are the names of the Imaginations themselves;
that is to say, of those Ideas, or mentall Images we have of all things
wee see, or remember: And others againe are names of Names; or of
different sorts of Speech: As Universall, Plurall, Singular, Negation,
True, False, Syllogisme, Interrogation, Promise, Covenant, are the names
of certain Forms of Speech. Others serve to shew the Consequence, or
Repugnance of one name to another; as when one saith, "A Man is a Body,"
hee intendeth that the name of Body is necessarily consequent to the
name of Man; as being but severall names of the same thing, Man; which
Consequence is signified by coupling them together with the word Is.
And as wee use the Verbe Is; so the Latines use their Verbe Est, and
the Greeks their Esti through all its Declinations. Whether all other
Nations of the world have in their severall languages a word that
answereth to it, or not, I cannot tell; but I am sure they have not need
of it: For the placing of two names in order may serve to signifie their
Consequence, if it were the custome, (for Custome is it, that give words
their force,) as well as the words Is, or Bee, or Are, and the like.

And if it were so, that there were a Language without any Verb
answerable to Est, or Is, or Bee; yet the men that used it would bee
not a jot the lesse capable of Inferring, Concluding, and of all kind of
Reasoning, than were the Greeks, and Latines. But what then would become
of these Terms, of Entity, Essence, Essentiall, Essentially, that are
derived from it, and of many more that depend on these, applyed as most
commonly they are? They are therefore no Names of Things; but Signes, by
which wee make known, that wee conceive the Consequence of one name or
Attribute to another: as when we say, "a Man, is, a living Body," wee
mean not that the Man is one thing, the Living Body another, and the Is,
or Beeing a third: but that the Man, and the Living Body, is the same
thing: because the Consequence, "If hee bee a Man, hee is a living
Body," is a true Consequence, signified by that word Is. Therefore, to
bee a Body, to Walke, to bee Speaking, to Live, to See, and the like
Infinitives; also Corporeity, Walking, Speaking, Life, Sight, and the
like, that signifie just the same, are the names of Nothing; as I have
elsewhere more amply expressed.

But to what purpose (may some man say) is such subtilty in a work of
this nature, where I pretend to nothing but what is necessary to the
doctrine of Government and Obedience? It is to this purpose, that men
may no longer suffer themselves to be abused, by them, that by this
doctrine of Separated Essences, built on the Vain Philosophy of
Aristotle, would fright them from Obeying the Laws of their Countrey,
with empty names; as men fright Birds from the Corn with an empty
doublet, a hat, and a crooked stick. For it is upon this ground, that
when a Man is dead and buried, they say his Soule (that is his Life) can
walk separated from his Body, and is seen by night amongst the graves.
Upon the same ground they say, that the Figure, and Colour, and Tast of
a peece of Bread, has a being, there, where they say there is no Bread:
And upon the same ground they say, that Faith, and Wisdome, and other
Vertues are sometimes powred into a man, sometimes blown into him from
Heaven; as if the Vertuous, and their Vertues could be asunder; and a
great many other things that serve to lessen the dependance of Subjects
on the Soveraign Power of their Countrey. For who will endeavour to obey
the Laws, if he expect Obedience to be Powred or Blown into him? Or who
will not obey a Priest, that can make God, rather than his Soveraign;
nay than God himselfe? Or who, that is in fear of Ghosts, will not bear
great respect to those that can make the Holy Water, that drives them
from him? And this shall suffice for an example of the Errors, which are
brought into the Church, from the Entities, and Essences of Aristotle:
which it may be he knew to be false Philosophy; but writ it as a thing
consonant to, and corroborative of their Religion; and fearing the fate
of Socrates.

Being once fallen into this Error of Separated Essences, they are
thereby necessarily involved in many other absurdities that follow it.
For seeing they will have these Forms to be reall, they are obliged to
assign them some place. But because they hold them Incorporeall, without
all dimension of Quantity, and all men know that Place is Dimension, and
not to be filled, but by that which is Corporeall; they are driven to
uphold their credit with a distinction, that they are not indeed any
where Circumscriptive, but Definitive: Which Terms being meer Words, and
in this occasion insignificant, passe onely in Latine, that the vanity
of them may bee concealed. For the Circumscription of a thing, is
nothing else but the Determination, or Defining of its Place; and so
both the Terms of the Distinction are the same. And in particular, of
the Essence of a Man, which (they say) is his Soule, they affirm it,
to be All of it in his little Finger, and All of it in every other Part
(how small soever) of his Body; and yet no more Soule in the Whole Body,
than in any one of those Parts. Can any man think that God is served
with such absurdities? And yet all this is necessary to beleeve,
to those that will beleeve the Existence of an Incorporeall Soule,
Separated from the Body.

And when they come to give account, how an Incorporeall Substance can
be capable of Pain, and be tormented in the fire of Hell, or Purgatory,
they have nothing at all to answer, but that it cannot be known how fire
can burn Soules.

Again, whereas Motion is change of Place, and Incorporeall Substances
are not capable of Place, they are troubled to make it seem possible,
how a Soule can goe hence, without the Body to Heaven, Hell, or
Purgatory; and how the Ghosts of men (and I may adde of their clothes
which they appear in) can walk by night in Churches, Church-yards, and
other places of Sepulture. To which I know not what they can answer,
unlesse they will say, they walke Definitive, not Circumscriptive, or
Spiritually, not Temporally: for such egregious distinctions are equally
applicable to any difficulty whatsoever.




Nunc-stans

For the meaning of Eternity, they will not have it to be an Endlesse
Succession of Time; for then they should not be able to render a reason
how Gods Will, and Praeordaining of things to come, should not be before
his Praescience of the same, as the Efficient Cause before the Effect,
or Agent before the Action; nor of many other their bold opinions
concerning the Incomprehensible Nature of God. But they will teach us,
that Eternity is the Standing still of the Present Time, a Nunc-stans
(as the Schools call it;) which neither they, nor any else understand,
no more than they would a Hic-stans for an Infinite greatnesse of Place.




One Body In Many Places, And Many Bodies In One Place At Once

And whereas men divide a Body in their thought, by numbring parts of
it, and in numbring those parts, number also the parts of the Place
it filled; it cannot be, but in making many parts, wee make also many
places of those parts; whereby there cannot bee conceived in the mind of
any man, more, or fewer parts, than there are places for: yet they will
have us beleeve, that by the Almighty power of God, one body may be at
one and the same time in many places; and many bodies at one and the
same time in one place; as if it were an acknowledgment of the Divine
Power, to say, that which is, is not; or that which has been, has not
been. And these are but a small part of the Incongruities they are
forced to, from their disputing Philosophically, in stead of admiring,
and adoring of the Divine and Incomprehensible Nature; whose Attributes
cannot signifie what he is, but ought to signifie our desire to honour
him, with the best Appellations we can think on. But they that venture
to reason of his Nature, from these Attributes of Honour, losing their
understanding in the very first attempt, fall from one Inconvenience
into another, without end, and without number; in the same manner,
as when a man ignorant of the Ceremonies of Court, comming into the
presence of a greater Person than he is used to speak to, and stumbling
at his entrance, to save himselfe from falling, lets slip his Cloake;
to recover his Cloake, lets fall his Hat; and with one disorder after
another, discovers his astonishment and rusticity.




Absurdities In Naturall Philosophy, As Gravity The Cause Of Heavinesse

Then for Physiques, that is, the knowledge of the subordinate, and
secundary causes of naturall events; they render none at all, but empty
words. If you desire to know why some kind of bodies sink naturally
downwards toward the Earth, and others goe naturally from it; The
Schools will tell you out of Aristotle, that the bodies that sink
downwards, are Heavy; and that this Heavinesse is it that causes them to
descend: But if you ask what they mean by Heavinesse, they will define
it to bee an endeavour to goe to the center of the Earth: so that the
cause why things sink downward, is an Endeavour to be below: which is
as much as to say, that bodies descend, or ascend, because they doe.
Or they will tell you the center of the Earth is the place of Rest, and
Conservation for Heavy things; and therefore they endeavour to be there:
As if Stones, and Metalls had a desire, or could discern the place they
would bee at, as Man does; or loved Rest, as Man does not; or that a
peece of Glasse were lesse safe in the Window, than falling into the
Street.




Quantity Put Into Body Already Made

If we would know why the same Body seems greater (without adding to it)
one time, than another; they say, when it seems lesse, it is Condensed;
when greater, Rarefied. What is that Condensed, and Rarefied? Condensed,
is when there is in the very same Matter, lesse Quantity than before;
and Rarefied, when more. As if there could be Matter, that had not some
determined Quantity; when Quantity is nothing else but the Determination
of Matter; that is to say of Body, by which we say one Body is greater,
or lesser than another, by thus, or thus much. Or as if a Body were made
without any Quantity at all, and that afterwards more, or lesse were put
into it, according as it is intended the Body should be more, or lesse
Dense.




Powring In Of Soules

For the cause of the Soule of Man, they say, Creatur Infundendo, and
Creando Infunditur: that is, "It is Created by Powring it in," and
"Powred in by Creation."




Ubiquity Of Apparition

For the Cause of Sense, an ubiquity of Species; that is, of the Shews
or Apparitions of objects; which when they be Apparitions to the Eye, is
Sight; when to the Eare, Hearing; to the Palate, Tast; to the Nostrill,
Smelling; and to the rest of the Body, Feeling.




Will, The Cause Of Willing

For cause of the Will, to doe any particular action, which is called
Volitio, they assign the Faculty, that is to say, the Capacity in
generall, that men have, to will sometimes one thing, sometimes another,
which is called Voluntas; making the Power the cause of the Act: As
if one should assign for cause of the good or evill Acts of men, their
Ability to doe them.




Ignorance An Occult Cause

And in many occasions they put for cause of Naturall events, their own
Ignorance, but disguised in other words: As when they say, Fortune is
the cause of things contingent; that is, of things whereof they know no
cause: And as when they attribute many Effects to Occult Qualities; that
is, qualities not known to them; and therefore also (as they thinke)
to no Man else. And to Sympathy, Antipathy, Antiperistasis, Specificall
Qualities, and other like Termes, which signifie neither the Agent that
produceth them, nor the Operation by which they are produced.

If such Metaphysiques, and Physiques as this, be not Vain Philosophy,
there was never any; nor needed St. Paul to give us warning to avoid it.




One Makes The Things Incongruent, Another The Incongruity

And for their Morall, and Civill Philosophy, it hath the same, or
greater absurdities. If a man doe an action of Injustice, that is to
say, an action contrary to the Law, God they say is the prime cause of
the Law, and also the prime cause of that, and all other Actions; but no
cause at all of the Injustice; which is the Inconformity of the Action
to the Law. This is Vain Philosophy. A man might as well say, that one
man maketh both a streight line, and a crooked, and another maketh their
Incongruity. And such is the Philosophy of all men that resolve of their
Conclusions, before they know their Premises; pretending to comprehend,
that which is Incomprehensible; and of Attributes of Honour to make
Attributes of Nature; as this distinction was made to maintain the
Doctrine of Free-Will, that is, of a Will of man, not subject to the
Will of God.




Private Appetite The Rule Of Publique Good:

Aristotle, and other Heathen Philosophers define Good, and Evill, by the
Appetite of men; and well enough, as long as we consider them governed
every one by his own Law: For in the condition of men that have no other
Law but their own Appetites, there can be no generall Rule of Good, and
Evill Actions. But in a Common-wealth this measure is false: Not the
Appetite of Private men, but the Law, which is the Will and Appetite of
the State is the measure. And yet is this Doctrine still practised; and
men judge the Goodnesse, or Wickednesse of their own, and of other mens
actions, and of the actions of the Common-wealth it selfe, by their own
Passions; and no man calleth Good or Evill, but that which is so in his
own eyes, without any regard at all to the Publique Laws; except onely
Monks, and Friers, that are bound by Vow to that simple obedience to
their Superiour, to which every Subject ought to think himself bound by
the Law of Nature to the Civill Soveraign. And this private measure of
Good, is a Doctrine, not onely Vain, but also Pernicious to the Publique
State.




And That Lawfull Marriage Is Unchastity

It is also Vain and false Philosophy, to say the work of Marriage is
repugnant to Chastity, or Continence, and by consequence to make them
Morall Vices; as they doe, that pretend Chastity, and Continence, for
the ground of denying Marriage to the Clergy. For they confesse it is
no more, but a Constitution of the Church, that requireth in those holy
Orders that continually attend the Altar, and administration of the
Eucharist, a continuall Abstinence from women, under the name of
continuall Chastity, Continence, and Purity. Therefore they call the
lawfull use of Wives, want of Chastity, and Continence; and so make
Marriage a Sin, or at least a thing so impure, and unclean, as to render
a man unfit for the Altar. If the Law were made because the use of Wives
is Incontinence, and contrary to Chastity, then all marriage is vice; If
because it is a thing too impure, and unclean for a man consecrated to
God; much more should other naturall, necessary, and daily works which
all men doe, render men unworthy to bee Priests, because they are more
unclean.

But the secret foundation of this prohibition of Marriage of Priests, is
not likely to have been laid so slightly, as upon such errours in Morall
Philosophy; nor yet upon the preference of single life, to the estate of
Matrimony; which proceeded from the wisdome of St. Paul, who perceived
how inconvenient a thing it was, for those that in those times of
persecution were Preachers of the Gospel, and forced to fly from one
countrey to another, to be clogged with the care of wife and children;
but upon the design of the Popes, and Priests of after times, to make
themselves the Clergy, that is to say, sole Heirs of the Kingdome of God
in this world; to which it was necessary to take from them the use of
Marriage, because our Saviour saith, that at the coming of his Kingdome
the Children of God shall "neither Marry, nor bee given in Marriage, but
shall bee as the Angels in heaven;" that is to say, Spirituall. Seeing
then they had taken on them the name of Spirituall, to have allowed
themselves (when there was no need) the propriety of Wives, had been an
Incongruity.




And That All Government But Popular, Is Tyranny

From Aristotles Civill Philosophy, they have learned, to call all manner
of Common-wealths but the Popular, (such as was at that time the state
of Athens,) Tyranny. All Kings they called Tyrants; and the Aristocracy
of the thirty Governours set up there by the Lacedemonians that subdued
them, the thirty Tyrants: As also to call the condition of the people
under the Democracy, Liberty. A Tyrant originally signified no more
simply, but a Monarch: But when afterwards in most parts of Greece that
kind of government was abolished, the name began to signifie, not onely
the thing it did before, but with it, the hatred which the Popular
States bare towards it: As also the name of King became odious after the
deposing of the Kings in Rome, as being a thing naturall to all men,
to conceive some great Fault to be signified in any Attribute, that is
given in despight, and to a great Enemy. And when the same men shall be
displeased with those that have the administration of the Democracy,
or Aristocracy, they are not to seek for disgraceful names to expresse
their anger in; but call readily the one Anarchy, and the other
Oligarchy, or the Tyranny Of A Few. And that which offendeth the People,
is no other thing, but that they are governed, not as every one of them
would himselfe, but as the Publique Representant, be it one Man, or an
Assembly of men thinks fit; that is, by an Arbitrary government: for
which they give evill names to their Superiors; never knowing (till
perhaps a little after a Civill warre) that without such Arbitrary
government, such Warre must be perpetuall; and that it is Men, and Arms,
not Words, and Promises, that make the Force and Power of the Laws.




That Not Men, But Law Governs

And therefore this is another Errour of Aristotles Politiques, that in
a wel ordered Common-wealth, not Men should govern, but the Laws. What
man, that has his naturall Senses, though he can neither write nor read,
does not find himself governed by them he fears, and beleeves can kill
or hurt him when he obeyeth not? or that beleeves the Law can hurt him;
that is, Words, and Paper, without the Hands, and Swords of men? And
this is of the number of pernicious Errors: for they induce men, as oft
as they like not their Governours, to adhaere to those that call them
Tyrants, and to think it lawfull to raise warre against them: And yet
they are many times cherished from the Pulpit, by the Clergy.




Laws Over The Conscience

There is another Errour in their Civill Philosophy (which they never
learned of Aristotle, nor Cicero, nor any other of the Heathen,) to
extend the power of the Law, which is the Rule of Actions onely, to the
very Thoughts, and Consciences of men, by Examination, and Inquisition
of what they Hold, notwithstanding the Conformity of their Speech and
Actions: By which, men are either punished for answering the truth
of their thoughts, or constrained to answer an untruth for fear of
punishment. It is true, that the Civill Magistrate, intending to employ
a Minister in the charge of Teaching, may enquire of him, if hee bee
content to Preach such, and such Doctrines; and in case of refusall,
may deny him the employment: But to force him to accuse himselfe of
Opinions, when his Actions are not by Law forbidden, is against the
Law of Nature; and especially in them, who teach, that a man shall bee
damned to Eternall and extream torments, if he die in a false opinion
concerning an Article of the Christian Faith. For who is there, that
knowing there is so great danger in an error, when the naturall care
of himself, compelleth not to hazard his Soule upon his own judgement,
rather than that of any other man that is unconcerned in his damnation?




Private Interpretation Of Law

For a Private man, without the Authority of the Common-wealth, that is
to say, without permission from the Representant thereof, to Interpret
the Law by his own Spirit, is another Error in the Politiques; but not
drawn from Aristotle, nor from any other of the Heathen Philosophers.
For none of them deny, but that in the Power of making Laws, is
comprehended also the Power of Explaining them when there is need. And
are not the Scriptures, in all places where they are Law, made Law by
the Authority of the Common-wealth, and consequently, a part of the
Civill Law?

Of the same kind it is also, when any but the Soveraign restraineth in
any man that power which the Common-wealth hath not restrained: as they
do, that impropriate the Preaching of the Gospell to one certain Order
of men, where the Laws have left it free. If the State give me leave to
preach, or teach; that is, if it forbid me not, no man can forbid me.
If I find my selfe amongst the Idolaters of America, shall I that am a
Christian, though not in Orders, think it a sin to preach Jesus Christ,
till I have received Orders from Rome? or when I have preached, shall
not I answer their doubts, and expound the Scriptures to them; that is
shall I not Teach? But for this may some say, as also for administring
to them the Sacraments, the necessity shall be esteemed for a sufficient
Mission; which is true: But this is true also, that for whatsoever,
a dispensation is due for the necessity, for the same there needs no
dispensation, when there is no Law that forbids it. Therefore to deny
these Functions to those, to whom the Civill Soveraigne hath not denyed
them, is a taking away of a lawfull Liberty, which is contrary to the
Doctrine of Civill Government.




Language Of Schoole-Divines

More examples of Vain Philosophy, brought into Religion by the Doctors
of Schoole-Divinity, might be produced; but other men may if they please
observe them of themselves. I shall onely adde this, that the
Writings of Schoole-Divines, are nothing else for the most part, but
insignificant Traines of strange and barbarous words, or words otherwise
used, then in the common use of the Latine tongue; such as would pose
Cicero, and Varro, and all the Grammarians of ancient Rome. Which if any
man would see proved, let him (as I have said once before) see whether
he can translate any Schoole-Divine into any of the Modern tongues, as
French, English, or any other copious language: for that which cannot
in most of these be made Intelligible, is no Intelligible in the Latine.
Which Insignificancy of language, though I cannot note it for false
Philosophy; yet it hath a quality, not onely to hide the Truth, but also
to make men think they have it, and desist from further search.




Errors From Tradition

Lastly, for the errors brought in from false, or uncertain History, what
is all the Legend of fictitious Miracles, in the lives of the Saints;
and all the Histories of Apparitions, and Ghosts, alledged by the
Doctors of the Romane Church, to make good their Doctrines of Hell, and
purgatory, the power of Exorcisme, and other Doctrines which have no
warrant, neither in Reason, nor Scripture; as also all those Traditions
which they call the unwritten Word of God; but old Wives Fables?
Whereof, though they find dispersed somewhat in the Writings of the
ancient Fathers; yet those Fathers were men, that might too easily
beleeve false reports; and the producing of their opinions for testimony
of the truth of what they beleeved, hath no other force with them that
(according to the Counsell of St. John 1 Epist. chap. 4. verse 1.)
examine Spirits, than in all things that concern the power of the Romane
Church, (the abuse whereof either they suspected not, or had benefit
by it,) to discredit their testimony, in respect of too rash beleef of
reports; which the most sincere men, without great knowledge of naturall
causes, (such as the Fathers were) are commonly the most subject to: For
naturally, the best men are the least suspicious of fraudulent purposes.
Gregory the Pope, and S. Bernard have somewhat of Apparitions of Ghosts,
that said they were in Purgatory; and so has our Beda: but no where, I
beleeve, but by report from others. But if they, or any other, relate
any such stories of their own knowledge, they shall not thereby confirm
the more such vain reports; but discover their own Infirmity, or Fraud.




Suppression Of Reason

With the Introduction of False, we may joyn also the suppression of True
Philosophy, by such men, as neither by lawfull authority, nor sufficient
study, are competent Judges of the truth. Our own Navigations make
manifest, and all men learned in humane Sciences, now acknowledge there
are Antipodes: And every day it appeareth more and more, that Years, and
Dayes are determined by Motions of the Earth. Neverthelesse, men that
have in their Writings but supposed such Doctrine, as an occasion to
lay open the reasons for, and against it, have been punished for it
by Authority Ecclesiasticall. But what reason is there for it? Is it
because such opinions are contrary to true Religion? that cannot be,
if they be true. Let therefore the truth be first examined by competent
Judges, or confuted by them that pretend to know the contrary. Is
it because they be contrary to the Religion established? Let them be
silenced by the Laws of those, to whom the Teachers of them are subject;
that is, by the Laws Civill: For disobedience may lawfully be punished
in them, that against the Laws teach even true Philosophy. Is it because
they tend to disorder in Government, as countenancing Rebellion, or
Sedition? then let them be silenced, and the Teachers punished by vertue
of his power to whom the care of the Publique quiet is committed; which
is the Authority Civill. For whatsoever Power Ecclesiastiques take upon
themselves (in any place where they are subject to the State) in their
own Right, though they call it Gods Right, is but Usurpation.




CHAPTER XLVII. OF THE BENEFIT THAT PROCEEDETH FROM SUCH DARKNESSE, AND
TO WHOM IT ACCREWETH




He That Receiveth Benefit By A Fact, Is Presumed To Be The Author

Cicero maketh honorable mention of one of the Cassii, a severe Judge
amongst the Romans, for a custome he had, in Criminal causes, (when the
testimony of the witnesses was not sufficient,) to ask the Accusers,
Cui Bono; that is to say, what Profit, Honor, or other Contentment, the
accused obtained, or expected by the Fact. For amongst Praesumptions,
there is none that so evidently declareth the Author, as doth the
BENEFIT of the Action. By the same rule I intend in this place to
examine, who they may be, that have possessed the People so long in this
part of Christendome, with these Doctrines, contrary to the Peaceable
Societies of Mankind.




That The Church Militant Is The Kingdome Of God, Was First Taught By
The Church Of Rome

And first, to this Error, That The Present Church Now Militant On Earth,
Is The Kingdome Of God, (that is, the Kingdome of Glory, or the Land of
Promise; not the Kingdome of Grace, which is but a Promise of the
Land,) are annexed these worldly Benefits, First, that the Pastors,
and Teachers of the Church, are entitled thereby, as Gods Publique
Ministers, to a Right of Governing the Church; and consequently (because
the Church, and Common-wealth are the same Persons) to be Rectors, and
Governours of the Common-wealth. By this title it is, that the Pope
prevailed with the subjects of all Christian Princes, to beleeve, that
to disobey him, was to disobey Christ himselfe; and in all differences
between him and other Princes, (charmed with the word Power Spirituall,)
to abandon their lawfull Soveraigns; which is in effect an universall
Monarchy over all Christendome. For though they were first invested in
the right of being Supreme Teachers of Christian Doctrine, by, and
under Christian Emperors, within the limits of the Romane Empire (as is
acknowledged by themselves) by the title of Pontifex Maximus, who was an
Officer subject to the Civill State; yet after the Empire was divided,
and dissolved, it was not hard to obtrude upon the people already
subject to them, another Title, namely, the Right of St. Peter; not
onely to save entire their pretended Power; but also to extend the same
over the same Christian Provinces, though no more united in the Empire
of Rome. This Benefit of an Universall Monarchy, (considering the desire
of men to bear Rule) is a sufficient Presumption, that the popes that
pretended to it, and for a long time enjoyed it, were the Authors of
the Doctrine, by which it was obtained; namely, that the Church now
on Earth, is the Kingdome of Christ. For that granted, it must be
understood, that Christ hath some Lieutenant amongst us, by whom we are
to be told what are his Commandements.

After that certain Churches had renounced this universall Power of the
Pope, one would expect in reason, that the Civill Soveraigns in all
those Churches, should have recovered so much of it, as (before they had
unadvisedly let it goe) was their own Right, and in their own hands.
And in England it was so in effect; saving that they, by whom the Kings
administred the Government of Religion, by maintaining their imployment
to be in Gods Right, seemed to usurp, if not a Supremacy, yet an
Independency on the Civill Power: and they but seemed to usurp it, in
as much as they acknowledged a Right in the King, to deprive them of the
Exercise of their Functions at his pleasure.




And Maintained Also By The Presbytery

But in those places where the Presbytery took that Office, though many
other Doctrines of the Church of Rome were forbidden to be taught; yet
this Doctrine, that the Kingdome of Christ is already come, and that it
began at the Resurrection of our Saviour, was still retained. But Cui
Bono? What Profit did they expect from it? The same which the Popes
expected: to have a Soveraign Power over the People. For what is it for
men to excommunicate their lawful King, but to keep him from all places
of Gods publique Service in his own Kingdom? and with force to resist
him, when he with force endeavoureth to correct them? Or what is it,
without Authority from the Civill Soveraign, to excommunicate any
person, but to take from him his Lawfull Liberty, that is, to usurpe
an unlawfull Power over their Brethren? The Authors therefore of this
Darknesse in Religion, are the Romane, and the Presbyterian Clergy.




Infallibility

To this head, I referre also all those Doctrines, that serve them to
keep the possession of this spirituall Soveraignty after it is gotten.
As first, that the Pope In His Publique Capacity Cannot Erre. For who
is there, that beleeving this to be true, will not readily obey him in
whatsoever he commands?




Subjection Of Bishops

Secondly, that all other Bishops, in what Common-wealth soever, have
not their Right, neither immediately from God, nor mediately from their
Civill Soveraigns, but from the Pope, is a Doctrine, by which there
comes to be in every Christian Common-wealth many potent men, (for so
are Bishops,) that have their dependance on the Pope, and owe obedience
to him, though he be a forraign Prince; by which means he is able, (as
he hath done many times) to raise a Civill War against the State
that submits not it self to be governed according to his pleasure and
Interest.




Exemptions Of The Clergy

Thirdly, the exemption of these, and of all other Priests, and of all
Monkes, and Fryers, from the Power of the Civill Laws. For by this
means, there is a great part of every Common-wealth, that enjoy the
benefit of the Laws, and are protected by the Power of the Civill State,
which neverthelesse pay no part of the Publique expence; nor are
lyable to the penalties, as other Subjects, due to their crimes; and
consequently, stand not in fear of any man, but the Pope; and adhere to
him onely, to uphold his universall Monarchy.




The Names Of Sacerdotes, And Sacrifices

Fourthly, the giving to their Priests (which is no more in the New
Testament but Presbyters, that is, Elders) the name of Sacerdotes, that
is, Sacrificers, which was the title of the Civill Soveraign, and his
publique Ministers, amongst the Jews, whilest God was their King. Also,
the making the Lords Supper a Sacrifice, serveth to make the People
beleeve the Pope hath the same power over all Christian, that Moses
and Aaron had over the Jews; that is to say, all power, both Civill and
Ecclesiasticall, as the High Priest then had.




The Sacramentation Of Marriage

Fiftly, the teaching that Matrimony is a Sacrament, giveth to the
Clergy the Judging of the lawfulnesse of Marriages; and thereby, of what
Children are Legitimate; and consequently, of the Right of Succession to
haereditary Kingdomes.




The Single Life Of Priests

Sixtly, the Deniall of Marriage to Priests, serveth to assure this Power
of the pope over Kings. For if a King be a Priest, he cannot Marry, and
transmit his Kingdome to his Posterity; If he be not a Priest then the
Pope pretendeth this Authority Ecclesiasticall over him, and over his
people.




Auricular Confession

Seventhly, from Auricular Confession, they obtain, for the assurance of
their Power, better intelligence of the designs of Princes, and great
persons in the Civill State, than these can have of the designs of the
State Ecclesiasticall.




Canonization Of Saints, And Declaring Of Martyrs

Eighthly, by the Canonization of Saints, and declaring who are Martyrs,
they assure their Power, in that they induce simple men into an
obstinacy against the Laws and Commands of their Civill Soveraigns even
to death, if by the Popes excommunication, they be declared Heretiques
or Enemies to the Church; that is, (as they interpret it,) to the Pope.




Transubstantiation, Penance, Absolution

Ninthly, they assure the same, by the Power they ascribe to every
Priest, of making Christ; and by the Power of ordaining Pennance; and of
Remitting, and Retaining of sins.




Purgatory, Indulgences, Externall Works

Tenthly, by the Doctrine of Purgatory, of Justification by externall
works, and of Indulgences, the Clergy is enriched.




Daemonology And Exorcism

Eleventhly, by their Daemonology, and the use of Exorcisme, and other
things appertaining thereto, they keep (or thinke they keep) the People
more in awe of their Power.




School-Divinity

Lastly, the Metaphysiques, Ethiques, and Politiques of Aristotle, the
frivolous Distinctions, barbarous Terms, and obscure Language of the
Schoolmen, taught in the Universities, (which have been all erected and
regulated by the Popes Authority,) serve them to keep these Errors
from being detected, and to make men mistake the Ignis Fatuus of Vain
Philosophy, for the Light of the Gospell.




The Authors Of Spirituall Darknesse, Who They Be

To these, if they sufficed not, might be added other of their dark
Doctrines, the profit whereof redoundeth manifestly, to the setting up
of an unlawfull Power over the lawfull Soveraigns of Christian People;
or for the sustaining of the same, when it is set up; or to the worldly
Riches, Honour, and Authority of those that sustain it. And therefore by
the aforesaid rule, of Cui Bono, we may justly pronounce for the Authors
of all this Spirituall Darknesse, the Pope, and Roman Clergy, and
all those besides that endeavour to settle in the mindes of men this
erroneous Doctrine, that the Church now on Earth, is that Kingdome of
God mentioned in the Old and New Testament.

But the Emperours, and other Christian Soveraigns, under whose
Government these Errours, and the like encroachments of Ecclesiastiques
upon their Office, at first crept in, to the disturbance of their
possessions, and of the tranquillity of their Subjects, though they
suffered the same for want of foresight of the Sequel, and of insight
into the designs of their Teachers, may neverthelesse bee esteemed
accessories to their own, and the Publique dammage; For without
their Authority there could at first no seditious Doctrine have been
publiquely preached. I say they might have hindred the same in the
beginning: But when the people were once possessed by those spirituall
men, there was no humane remedy to be applyed, that any man could
invent: And for the remedies that God should provide, who never faileth
in his good time to destroy all the Machinations of men against the
Truth, wee are to attend his good pleasure, that suffereth many times
the prosperity of his enemies, together with their ambition, to grow
to such a height, as the violence thereof openeth the eyes, which the
warinesse of their predecessours had before sealed up, and makes men
by too much grasping let goe all, as Peters net was broken, by the
struggling of too great a multitude of Fishes; whereas the Impatience
of those, that strive to resist such encroachment, before their Subjects
eyes were opened, did but encrease the power they resisted. I doe not
therefore blame the Emperour Frederick for holding the stirrop to our
countryman Pope Adrian; for such was the disposition of his subjects
then, as if hee had not doe it, hee was not likely to have succeeded in
the Empire: But I blame those, that in the beginning, when their power
was entire, by suffering such Doctrines to be forged in the Universities
of their own Dominions, have holden the Stirrop to all the succeeding
Popes, whilest they mounted into the Thrones of all Christian
Soveraigns, to ride, and tire, both them, and their people, at their
pleasure.

But as the Inventions of men are woven, so also are they ravelled out;
the way is the same, but the order is inverted: The web begins at the
first Elements of Power, which are Wisdom, Humility, Sincerity, and
other vertues of the Apostles, whom the people converted, obeyed, out
of Reverence, not by Obligation: Their Consciences were free, and their
Words and Actions subject to none but the Civill Power. Afterwards the
Presbyters (as the Flocks of Christ encreased) assembling to consider
what they should teach, and thereby obliging themselves to teach nothing
against the Decrees of their Assemblies, made it to be thought the
people were thereby obliged to follow their Doctrine, and when
they refused, refused to keep them company, (that was then called
Excommunication,) not as being Infidels, but as being disobedient: And
this was the first knot upon their Liberty. And the number of Presbyters
encreasing, the Presbyters of the chief City or Province, got themselves
an authority over the parochiall Presbyters, and appropriated to
themselves the names of Bishops: And this was a second knot on Christian
Liberty. Lastly, the Bishop of Rome, in regard of the Imperiall City,
took upon him an Authority (partly by the wills of the Emperours
themselves, and by the title of Pontifex Maximus, and at last when the
Emperours were grown weak, by the priviledges of St. Peter) over all
other Bishops of the Empire: Which was the third and last knot, and the
whole Synthesis and Construction of the Pontificall Power.

And therefore the Analysis, or Resolution is by the same way; but
beginning with the knot that was last tyed; as wee may see in the
dissolution of the praeterpoliticall Church Government in England.

First, the Power of the Popes was dissolved totally by Queen Elizabeth;
and the Bishops, who before exercised their Functions in Right of the
Pope, did afterwards exercise the same in Right of the Queen and her
Successours; though by retaining the phrase of Jure Divino, they were
thought to demand it by immediate Right from God: And so was untyed the
first knot. After this, the Presbyterians lately in England obtained the
putting down of Episcopacy: And so was the second knot dissolved:
And almost at the same time, the Power was taken also from the
Presbyterians: And so we are reduced to the Independency of the
Primitive Christians to follow Paul, or Cephas, or Apollos, every man
as he liketh best: Which, if it be without contention, and without
measuring the Doctrine of Christ, by our affection to the Person of his
Minister, (the fault which the Apostle reprehended in the Corinthians,)
is perhaps the best: First, because there ought to be no Power over the
Consciences of men, but of the Word it selfe, working Faith in every
one, not alwayes according to the purpose of them that Plant and Water,
but of God himself, that giveth the Increase: and secondly, because it
is unreasonable in them, who teach there is such danger in every little
Errour, to require of a man endued with Reason of his own, to follow the
Reason of any other man, or of the most voices of many other men; Which
is little better, then to venture his Salvation at crosse and pile. Nor
ought those Teachers to be displeased with this losse of their antient
Authority: For there is none should know better then they, that power is
preserved by the same Vertues by which it is acquired; that is to
say, by Wisdome, Humility, Clearnesse of Doctrine, and sincerity of
Conversation; and not by suppression of the Naturall Sciences, and
of the Morality of Naturall Reason; nor by obscure Language; nor by
Arrogating to themselves more Knowledge than they make appear; nor by
Pious Frauds; nor by such other faults, as in the Pastors of Gods Church
are not only Faults, but also scandalls, apt to make men stumble one
time or other upon the suppression of their Authority.




Comparison Of The Papacy With The Kingdome Of Fayries

But after this Doctrine, "that the Church now Militant, is the Kingdome
of God spoken of in the Old and New Testament," was received in
the World; the ambition, and canvasing for the Offices that belong
thereunto, and especially for that great Office of being Christs
Lieutenant, and the Pompe of them that obtained therein the principal
Publique Charges, became by degrees so evident, that they lost the
inward Reverence due to the Pastorall Function: in so much as the Wisest
men, of them that had any power in the Civill State, needed nothing but
the authority of their Princes, to deny them any further Obedience. For,
from the time that the Bishop of Rome had gotten to be acknowledged for
Bishop Universall, by pretence of Succession to St. Peter, their whole
Hierarchy, or Kingdome of Darknesse, may be compared not unfitly to
the Kingdome of Fairies; that is, to the old wives Fables in England,
concerning Ghosts and Spirits, and the feats they play in the night. And
if a man consider the originall of this great Ecclesiasticall Dominion,
he will easily perceive, that the Papacy, is no other, than the Ghost of
the deceased Romane Empire, sitting crowned upon the grave thereof: For
so did the Papacy start up on a Sudden out of the Ruines of that Heathen
Power.

The Language also, which they use, both in the Churches, and in their
Publique Acts, being Latine, which is not commonly used by any Nation
now in the world, what is it but the Ghost of the Old Romane Language.

The Fairies in what Nation soever they converse, have but one Universall
King, which some Poets of ours call King Oberon; but the Scripture calls
Beelzebub, Prince of Daemons. The Ecclesiastiques likewise, in whose
Dominions soever they be found, acknowledge but one Universall King, the
Pope.

The Ecclesiastiques are Spirituall men, and Ghostly Fathers. The
Fairies are Spirits, and Ghosts. Fairies and Ghosts inhabite Darknesse,
Solitudes, and Graves. The Ecclesiastiques walke in Obscurity of
Doctrine, in Monasteries, Churches, and Churchyards.

The Ecclesiastiques have their Cathedral Churches; which, in what Towne
soever they be erected, by vertue of Holy Water, and certain Charmes
called Exorcismes, have the power to make those Townes, cities, that is
to say, Seats of Empire. The Fairies also have their enchanted Castles,
and certain Gigantique Ghosts, that domineer over the Regions round
about them.

The fairies are not to be seized on; and brought to answer for the hurt
they do. So also the Ecclesiastiques vanish away from the Tribunals of
Civill Justice.

The Ecclesiastiques take from young men, the use of Reason, by certain
Charms compounded of Metaphysiques, and Miracles, and Traditions, and
Abused Scripture, whereby they are good for nothing else, but to execute
what they command them. The Fairies likewise are said to take young
Children out of their Cradles, and to change them into Naturall Fools,
which Common people do therefore call Elves, and are apt to mischief.

In what Shop, or Operatory the Fairies make their Enchantment, the old
Wives have not determined. But the Operatories of the Clergy, are well
enough known to be the Universities, that received their Discipline from
Authority Pontificall.

When the Fairies are displeased with any body, they are said to
send their Elves, to pinch them. The Ecclesiastiques, when they are
displeased with any Civill State, make also their Elves, that is,
Superstitious, Enchanted Subjects, to pinch their Princes, by preaching
Sedition; or one Prince enchanted with promises, to pinch another.

The Fairies marry not; but there be amongst them Incubi, that have
copulation with flesh and bloud. The Priests also marry not.

The Ecclesiastiques take the Cream of the Land, by Donations of ignorant
men, that stand in aw of them, and by Tythes: So also it is in the Fable
of Fairies, that they enter into the Dairies, and Feast upon the Cream,
which they skim from the Milk.

What kind of Money is currant in the Kingdome of Fairies, is not
recorded in the Story. But the Ecclesiastiques in their Receipts accept
of the same Money that we doe; though when they are to make any Payment,
it is in Canonizations, Indulgences, and Masses.

To this, and such like resemblances between the Papacy, and the Kingdome
of Fairies, may be added this, that as the Fairies have no existence,
but in the Fancies of ignorant people, rising from the Traditions of old
Wives, or old Poets: so the Spirituall Power of the Pope (without the
bounds of his own Civill Dominion) consisteth onely in the Fear that
Seduced people stand in, of their Excommunication; upon hearing of false
Miracles, false Traditions, and false Interpretations of the Scripture.

It was not therefore a very difficult matter, for Henry 8. by his
Exorcisme; nor for Qu. Elizabeth by hers, to cast them out. But who
knows that this Spirit of Rome, now gone out, and walking by Missions
through the dry places of China, Japan, and the Indies, that yeeld him
little fruit, may not return, or rather an Assembly of Spirits worse
than he, enter, and inhabite this clean swept house, and make the End
thereof worse than the beginning? For it is not the Romane Clergy onely,
that pretends the Kingdome of God to be of this World, and thereby to
have a Power therein, distinct from that of the Civill State. And
this is all I had a designe to say, concerning the Doctrine of the
POLITIQUES. Which when I have reviewed, I shall willingly expose it to
the censure of my Countrey.




A REVIEW, AND CONCLUSION


From the contrariety of some of the Naturall Faculties of the Mind, one
to another, as also of one Passion to another, and from their reference
to Conversation, there has been an argument taken, to inferre an
impossibility that any one man should be sufficiently disposed to all
sorts of Civill duty. The Severity of Judgment, they say, makes men
Censorious, and unapt to pardon the Errours and Infirmities of other
men: and on the other side, Celerity of Fancy, makes the thoughts lesse
steddy than is necessary, to discern exactly between Right and Wrong.
Again, in all Deliberations, and in all Pleadings, the faculty of solid
Reasoning, is necessary: for without it, the Resolutions of men are
rash, and their Sentences unjust: and yet if there be not powerfull
Eloquence, which procureth attention and Consent, the effect of Reason
will be little. But these are contrary Faculties; the former being
grounded upon principles of Truth; the other upon Opinions already
received, true, or false; and upon the Passions and Interests of men,
which are different, and mutable.

And amongst the Passions, Courage, (by which I mean the Contempt of
Wounds, and violent Death) enclineth men to private Revenges, and
sometimes to endeavour the unsetling of the Publique Peace; And
Timorousnesse, many times disposeth to the desertion of the Publique
Defence. Both these they say cannot stand together in the same person.

And to consider the contrariety of mens Opinions, and Manners in
generall, It is they say, impossible to entertain a constant Civill
Amity with all those, with whom the Businesse of the world constrains
us to converse: Which Businesse consisteth almost in nothing else but a
perpetuall contention for Honor, Riches, and Authority.

To which I answer, that these are indeed great difficulties, but not
Impossibilities: For by Education, and Discipline, they may bee, and
are sometimes reconciled. Judgment, and Fancy may have place in the
same man; but by turnes; as the end which he aimeth at requireth. As the
Israelites in Egypt, were sometimes fastened to their labour of making
Bricks, and other times were ranging abroad to gather Straw: So also may
the Judgment sometimes be fixed upon one certain Consideration, and
the Fancy at another time wandring about the world. So also Reason,
and Eloquence, (though not perhaps in the Naturall Sciences, yet in the
Morall) may stand very well together. For wheresoever there is place for
adorning and preferring of Errour, there is much more place for adorning
and preferring of Truth, if they have it to adorn. Nor is there any
repugnancy between fearing the Laws, and not fearing a publique Enemy;
nor between abstaining from Injury, and pardoning it in others. There is
therefore no such Inconsistence of Humane Nature, with Civill Duties,
as some think. I have known cleernesse of Judgment, and largenesse of
Fancy; strength of Reason, and gracefull Elocution; a Courage for the
Warre, and a Fear for the Laws, and all eminently in one man; and that
was my most noble and honored friend Mr. Sidney Godolphin; who hating no
man, nor hated of any, was unfortunately slain in the beginning of the
late Civill warre, in the Publique quarrel, by an indiscerned, and an
undiscerning hand.

To the Laws of Nature, declared in the 15. Chapter, I would have this
added, "That every man is bound by Nature, as much as in him lieth, to
protect in Warre, the Authority, by which he is himself protected in
time of Peace." For he that pretendeth a Right of Nature to preserve
his owne body, cannot pretend a Right of Nature to destroy him, by whose
strength he is preserved: It is a manifest contradiction of himselfe.
And though this Law may bee drawn by consequence, from some of those
that are there already mentioned; yet the Times require to have it
inculcated, and remembred.

And because I find by divers English Books lately printed, that the
Civill warres have not yet sufficiently taught men, in what point of
time it is, that a Subject becomes obliged to the Conquerour; nor what
is Conquest; nor how it comes about, that it obliges men to obey his
Laws: Therefore for farther satisfaction of men therein, I say, the
point of time, wherein a man becomes subject of a Conquerour, is that
point, wherein having liberty to submit to him, he consenteth, either by
expresse words, or by other sufficient sign, to be his Subject. When it
is that a man hath the liberty to submit, I have showed before in the
end of the 21. Chapter; namely, that for him that hath no obligation to
his former Soveraign but that of an ordinary Subject, it is then, when
the means of his life is within the Guards and Garrisons of the Enemy;
for it is then, that he hath no longer Protection from him, but is
protected by the adverse party for his Contribution. Seeing
therefore such contribution is every where, as a thing inevitable,
(notwithstanding it be an assistance to the Enemy,) esteemed lawfull;
as totall Submission, which is but an assistance to the Enemy, cannot
be esteemed unlawfull. Besides, if a man consider that they who submit,
assist the Enemy but with part of their estates, whereas they that
refuse, assist him with the whole, there is no reason to call their
Submission, or Composition an Assistance; but rather a Detriment to the
Enemy. But if a man, besides the obligation of a Subject, hath taken
upon him a new obligation of a Souldier, then he hath not the liberty
to submit to a new Power, as long as the old one keeps the field, and
giveth him means of subsistence, either in his Armies, or Garrisons:
for in this case, he cannot complain of want of Protection, and means to
live as a Souldier: But when that also failes, a Souldier also may seek
his Protection wheresoever he has most hope to have it; and may lawfully
submit himself to his new Master. And so much for the Time when he may
do it lawfully, if hee will. If therefore he doe it, he is undoubtedly
bound to be a true Subject: For a Contract lawfully made, cannot
lawfully be broken.

By this also a man may understand, when it is, that men may be said to
be Conquered; and in what the nature of Conquest, and the Right of a
Conquerour consisteth: For this Submission is it implyeth them all.
Conquest, is not the Victory it self; but the Acquisition by Victory,
of a Right, over the persons of men. He therefore that is slain, is
Overcome, but not Conquered; He that is taken, and put into prison, or
chaines, is not Conquered, though Overcome; for he is still an Enemy,
and may save himself if hee can: But he that upon promise of Obedience,
hath his Life and Liberty allowed him, is then Conquered, and a Subject;
and not before. The Romanes used to say, that their Generall had
Pacified such a Province, that is to say, in English, Conquered it; and
that the Countrey was Pacified by Victory, when the people of it
had promised Imperata Facere, that is, To Doe What The Romane People
Commanded Them: this was to be Conquered. But this promise may be either
expresse, or tacite: Expresse, by Promise: Tacite, by other signes. As
for example, a man that hath not been called to make such an expresse
Promise, (because he is one whose power perhaps is not considerable;)
yet if he live under their Protection openly, hee is understood to
submit himselfe to the Government: But if he live there secretly, he is
lyable to any thing that may bee done to a Spie, and Enemy of the State.
I say not, hee does any Injustice, (for acts of open Hostility bear not
that name); but that he may be justly put to death. Likewise, if a man,
when his Country is conquered, be out of it, he is not Conquered, nor
Subject: but if at his return, he submit to the Government, he is bound
to obey it. So that Conquest (to define it) is the Acquiring of the
Right of Soveraignty by Victory. Which Right, is acquired, in the
peoples Submission, by which they contract with the Victor, promising
Obedience, for Life and Liberty.

In the 29th Chapter I have set down for one of the causes of the
Dissolutions of Common-wealths, their Imperfect Generation, consisting
in the want of an Absolute and Arbitrary Legislative Power; for want
whereof, the Civill Soveraign is fain to handle the Sword of Justice
unconstantly, and as if it were too hot for him to hold: One reason
whereof (which I have not there mentioned) is this, That they will all
of them justifie the War, by which their Power was at first gotten,
and whereon (as they think) their Right dependeth, and not on the
Possession. As if, for example, the Right of the Kings of England did
depend on the goodnesse of the cause of William the Conquerour, and upon
their lineall, and directest Descent from him; by which means, there
would perhaps be no tie of the Subjects obedience to their Soveraign
at this day in all the world: wherein whilest they needlessely think to
justifie themselves, they justifie all the successefull Rebellions that
Ambition shall at any time raise against them, and their Successors.
Therefore I put down for one of the most effectuall seeds of the Death
of any State, that the Conquerours require not onely a Submission of
mens actions to them for the future, but also an Approbation of all
their actions past; when there is scarce a Common-wealth in the world,
whose beginnings can in conscience be justified.

And because the name of Tyranny, signifieth nothing more, nor lesse,
than the name of Soveraignty, be it in one, or many men, saving that
they that use the former word, are understood to bee angry with them
they call Tyrants; I think the toleration of a professed hatred of
Tyranny, is a Toleration of hatred to Common-wealth in general, and
another evill seed, not differing much from the former. For to the
Justification of the Cause of a Conqueror, the Reproach of the Cause
of the Conquered, is for the most part necessary: but neither of them
necessary for the Obligation of the Conquered. And thus much I have
thought fit to say upon the Review of the first and second part of this
Discourse.

In the 35th Chapter, I have sufficiently declared out of the Scripture,
that in the Common-wealth of the Jewes, God himselfe was made the
Soveraign, by Pact with the People; who were therefore called his
Peculiar People, to distinguish them from the rest of the world, over
whom God reigned not by their Consent, but by his own Power: And that
in this Kingdome Moses was Gods Lieutenant on Earth; and that it was he
that told them what Laws God appointed to doe Execution; especially
in Capitall Punishments; not then thinking it a matter of so necessary
consideration, as I find it since. Wee know that generally in all
Common-wealths, the Execution of Corporeall Punishments, was either put
upon the Guards, or other Souldiers of the Soveraign Power; or given
to those, in whom want of means, contempt of honour, and hardnesse of
heart, concurred, to make them sue for such an Office. But amongst the
Israelites it was a Positive Law of God their Soveraign, that he that
was convicted of a capitall Crime, should be stoned to death by the
People; and that the Witnesses should cast the first Stone, and after
the Witnesses, then the rest of the People. This was a Law that designed
who were to be the Executioners; but not that any one should throw a
Stone at him before Conviction and Sentence, where the Congregation
was Judge. The Witnesses were neverthelesse to be heard before they
proceeded to Execution, unlesse the Fact were committed in the presence
of the Congregation it self, or in sight of the lawfull Judges; for
then there needed no other Witnesses but the Judges themselves.
Neverthelesse, this manner of proceeding being not throughly understood,
hath given occasion to a dangerous opinion, that any man may kill
another, is some cases, by a Right of Zeal; as if the Executions done
upon Offenders in the Kingdome of God in old time, proceeded not from
the Soveraign Command, but from the Authority of Private Zeal: which, if
we consider the texts that seem to favour it, is quite contrary.

First, where the Levites fell upon the People, that had made and
worshipped the Golden Calfe, and slew three thousand of them; it was by
the Commandement of Moses, from the mouth of God; as is manifest, Exod.
32.27. And when the Son of a woman of Israel had blasphemed God, they
that heard it, did not kill him, but brought him before Moses, who
put him under custody, till God should give Sentence against him; as
appears, Levit. 25.11, 12. Again, (Numbers 25.6, 7.) when Phinehas
killed Zimri and Cosbi, it was not by right of Private Zeale: Their
Crime was committed in the sight of the Assembly; there needed
no Witnesse; the Law was known, and he the heir apparent to the
Soveraignty; and which is the principall point, the Lawfulnesse of his
Act depended wholly upon a subsequent Ratification by Moses, whereof he
had no cause to doubt. And this Presumption of a future Ratification, is
sometimes necessary to the safety [of] a Common-wealth; as in a sudden
Rebellion, any man that can suppresse it by his own Power in the
Countrey where it begins, may lawfully doe it, and provide to have it
Ratified, or Pardoned, whilest it is in doing, or after it is done. Also
Numb. 35.30. it is expressely said, "Whosoever shall kill the Murtherer,
shall kill him upon the word of Witnesses:" but Witnesses suppose
a formall Judicature, and consequently condemn that pretence of Jus
Zelotarum. The Law of Moses concerning him that enticeth to Idolatry,
(that is to say, in the Kingdome of God to a renouncing of his
Allegiance) (Deut. 13.8.) forbids to conceal him, and commands the
Accuser to cause him to be put to death, and to cast the first stone at
him; but not to kill him before he be Condemned. And (Deut. 17. ver.4,
5, 6.) the Processe against Idolatry is exactly set down: For God there
speaketh to the People, as Judge, and commandeth them, when a man is
Accused of Idolatry, to Enquire diligently of the Fact, and finding it
true, then to Stone him; but still the hand of the Witnesse throweth
the first stone. This is not Private Zeal, but Publique Condemnation. In
like manner when a Father hath a rebellious Son, the Law is (Deut. 21.
18.) that he shall bring him before the Judges of the Town, and all the
people of the Town shall Stone him. Lastly, by pretence of these Laws
it was, that St. Steven was Stoned, and not by pretence of Private Zeal:
for before hee was carried away to Execution, he had Pleaded his Cause
before the High Priest. There is nothing in all this, nor in any other
part of the Bible, to countenance Executions by Private Zeal; which
being oftentimes but a conjunction of Ignorance and Passion, is against
both the Justice and Peace of a Common-wealth.

In the 36th Chapter I have said, that it is not declared in what
manner God spake supernaturally to Moses: Not that he spake not to him
sometimes by Dreams and Visions, and by a supernaturall Voice, as
to other Prophets: For the manner how he spake unto him from the
Mercy-seat, is expressely set down (Numbers 7.89.) in these words,
"From that time forward, when Moses entred into the Tabernacle of the
Congregation to speak with God, he heard a Voice which spake unto him
from over the Mercy-Seate, which is over the Arke of the Testimony, from
between the Cherubins he spake unto him." But it is not declared in
what consisted the praeeminence of the manner of Gods speaking to Moses,
above that of his speaking to other Prophets, as to Samuel, and to
Abraham, to whom he also spake by a Voice, (that is, by Vision) Unlesse
the difference consist in the cleernesse of the Vision. For Face
to Face, and Mouth to Mouth, cannot be literally understood of the
Infinitenesse, and Incomprehensibility of the Divine Nature.

And as to the whole Doctrine, I see not yet, but the principles of
it are true and proper; and the Ratiocination solid. For I ground the
Civill Right of Soveraigns, and both the Duty and Liberty of Subjects,
upon the known naturall Inclinations of Mankind, and upon the Articles
of the Law of Nature; of which no man, that pretends but reason enough
to govern his private family, ought to be ignorant. And for the Power
Ecclesiasticall of the same Soveraigns, I ground it on such Texts, as
are both evident in themselves, and consonant to the Scope of the whole
Scripture. And therefore am perswaded, that he that shall read it with
a purpose onely to be informed, shall be informed by it. But for those
that by Writing, or Publique Discourse, or by their eminent actions,
have already engaged themselves to the maintaining of contrary opinions,
they will not bee so easily satisfied. For in such cases, it is naturall
for men, at one and the same time, both to proceed in reading, and to
lose their attention, in the search of objections to that they had read
before: Of which, in a time wherein the interests of men are changed
(seeing much of that Doctrine, which serveth to the establishing of a
new Government, must needs be contrary to that which conduced to the
dissolution of the old,) there cannot choose but be very many.

In that part which treateth of a Christian Common-wealth, there are
some new Doctrines, which, it may be, in a State where the contrary were
already fully determined, were a fault for a Subject without leave to
divulge, as being an usurpation of the place of a Teacher. But in this
time, that men call not onely for Peace, but also for Truth, to offer
such Doctrines as I think True, and that manifestly tend to Peace and
Loyalty, to the consideration of those that are yet in deliberation, is
no more, but to offer New Wine, to bee put into New Cask, that bothe may
be preserved together. And I suppose, that then, when Novelty can breed
no trouble, nor disorder in a State, men are not generally so much
inclined to the reverence of Antiquity, as to preferre Ancient Errors,
before New and well proved Truth.

There is nothing I distrust more than my Elocution; which neverthelesse
I am confident (excepting the Mischances of the Presse) is not obscure.
That I have neglected the Ornament of quoting ancient Poets, Orators,
and Philosophers, contrary to the custome of late time, (whether I have
done well or ill in it,) proceedeth from my judgment, grounded on many
reasons. For first, all Truth of Doctrine dependeth either upon Reason,
or upon Scripture; both which give credit to many, but never receive it
from any Writer. Secondly, the matters in question are not of Fact, but
of Right, wherein there is no place for Witnesses. There is scarce any
of those old Writers, that contradicteth not sometimes both himself,
and others; which makes their Testimonies insufficient. Fourthly,
such Opinions as are taken onely upon Credit of Antiquity, are not
intrinsically the Judgment of those that cite them, but Words that
passe (like gaping) from mouth to mouth. Fiftly, it is many times with a
fraudulent Designe that men stick their corrupt Doctrine with the Cloves
of other mens Wit. Sixtly, I find not that the Ancients they cite, took
it for an Ornament, to doe the like with those that wrote before them.
Seventhly, it is an argument of Indigestion, when Greek and Latine
Sentences unchewed come up again, as they use to doe, unchanged. Lastly,
though I reverence those men of Ancient time, that either have written
Truth perspicuously, or set us in a better way to find it out our
selves; yet to the Antiquity it self I think nothing due: For if we will
reverence the Age, the Present is the Oldest. If the Antiquity of the
Writer, I am not sure, that generally they to whom such honor is given,
were more Ancient when they wrote, than I am that am Writing: But if it
bee well considered, the praise of Ancient Authors, proceeds not from
the reverence of the Dead, but from the competition, and mutuall envy of
the Living.

To conclude, there is nothing in this whole Discourse, nor in that I
writ before of the same Subject in Latine, as far as I can perceive,
contrary either to the Word of God, or to good Manners; or to the
disturbance of the Publique Tranquillity. Therefore I think it may be
profitably printed, and more profitably taught in the Universities, in
case they also think so, to whom the judgment of the same belongeth.
For seeing the Universities are the Fountains of Civill, and Morall
Doctrine, from whence the Preachers, and the Gentry, drawing such water
as they find, use to sprinkle the same (both from the Pulpit, and in
their Conversation) upon the People, there ought certainly to be
great care taken, to have it pure, both from the Venime of Heathen
Politicians, and from the Incantation of Deceiving Spirits. And by that
means the most men, knowing their Duties, will be the less subject to
serve the Ambition of a few discontented persons, in their purposes
against the State; and be the lesse grieved with the Contributions
necessary for their Peace, and Defence; and the Governours themselves
have the lesse cause, to maintain at the Common charge any greater
Army, than is necessary to make good the Publique Liberty, against the
Invasions and Encroachments of forraign Enemies.

And thus I have brought to an end my Discourse of Civill and
Ecclesiasticall Government, occasioned by the disorders of the present
time, without partiality, without application, and without other
designe, than to set before mens eyes the mutuall Relation between
Protection and Obedience; of which the condition of Humane Nature, and
the Laws Divine, (both Naturall and Positive) require an inviolable
observation. And though in the revolution of States, there can be no
very good Constellation for Truths of this nature to be born under, (as
having an angry aspect from the dissolvers of an old Government, and
seeing but the backs of them that erect a new;) yet I cannot think
it will be condemned at this time, either by the Publique Judge of
Doctrine, or by any that desires the continuance of Publique Peace. And
in this hope I return to my interrupted Speculation of Bodies Naturall;
wherein, (if God give me health to finish it,) I hope the Novelty will
as much please, as in the Doctrine of this Artificiall Body it useth to
offend. For such Truth, as opposeth no man profit, nor pleasure, is to
all men welcome.



FINIS




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEVIATHAN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of The English works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury, Volume 04 (of 11)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The English works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury, Volume 04 (of 11)

Author: Thomas Hobbes

Editor: Sir William Molesworth

Release date: August 12, 2024 [eBook #74236]

Language: English

Original publication: London: John Bohn, 1839

Credits: Emmanuel Ackerman, KD Weeks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENGLISH WORKS OF THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY, VOLUME 04 (OF 11) ***


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
The many instances of italic text are delimited with the ‘_’ character
as _italic_. Title page use of blackletter text uses the ‘=’ as a
delimiter.

Marginal sidenotes which spanned multiple pages were often repeated on
each page. These have been removed.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

                                  THE
                             ENGLISH WORKS
                                   OF
                             THOMAS HOBBES.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                  THE

                             ENGLISH WORKS

                                   OF

                             THOMAS HOBBES

                             OF MALMESBURY;

                     NOW FIRST COLLECTED AND EDITED

                                   BY

                     SIR WILLIAM MOLESWORTH, BART.

                                  ---

                                VOL. IV.

                                  ---




                                LONDON:
                               JOHN BOHN,
                    HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

                                  ---

                                MDCCCXL.


                                LONDON:
                C. RICHARDS, PRINTER, ST. MARTIN'S LANE.








                          CONTENTS OF VOL. IV.

                                -------

                                                                   PAGE

 TRIPOS; in Three Discourses:

       I. Human Nature, or the Fundamental Elements of Policy         1

      II. De Corpore Politico, or the Elements of Law                77

     III. Of Liberty and Necessity                                  229


 An Answer to Bishop Bramhall’s Book, called “The Catching of the
   Leviathan”                                                       279


 An Historical Narration concerning Heresy, and the Punishment
   thereof                                                          385


 Considerations upon the Reputation, Loyalty, Manners, and
   Religion of Thomas Hobbes                                        409


 Answer to Sir William Davenant’s Preface before “Gondibert”        441


 Letter to the Right Honourable Edward Howard                       458




                             HOBBES' TRIPOS

                                   IN

                          =Three Discourses.=

                               THE FIRST,
                             HUMAN NATURE:

                              THE SECOND,
                          DE CORPORE POLITICO:

                               THE THIRD,
                       OF LIBERTY AND NECESSITY.

                                  ---

                                   BY
                             THOMAS HOBBES
                             OF MALMESBURY.




                             HUMAN NATURE,
                                 OR THE
                          FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS
                                   OF
                                POLICY.

                          BEING A DISCOVERY OF

                   THE FACULTIES, ACTS, AND PASSIONS,

                                   OF

                            THE SOUL OF MAN,

                      FROM THEIR ORIGINAL CAUSES;

                           ACCORDING TO SUCH

                       PHILOSOPHICAL PRINCIPLES,

                 AS ARE NOT COMMONLY KNOWN OR ASSERTED.

                                   BY

                             THOMAS HOBBES

                             OF MALMESBURY.

                             TO THE READER.


                                -------


    READER,

It was thought good to let you know that _Mr. Hobbes_ hath written a
body of philosophy, upon such principles and in such order as are used
by men conversant in demonstration: this he hath distinguished into
three parts; _De Corpore_, _De Homine_, _De Cive_; each of the
consequents beginning at the end of the antecedent, and insisting
thereupon, as the later Books of _Euclid_ upon the former. The last of
these he hath already published in Latin beyond the seas; the second is
this now presented: and if these two receive justice in the world, there
is hope we may obtain the first. He whose care it is, and labour, to
satisfy the _judgment_ and _reason_ of mankind, will condescend so far,
we hope, to satisfy the _desire_ of those learned men whom these shall
either have found or made; which cannot be, until they shall
analytically have followed the grand _phænomena_ of states and kingdoms
through the passions of particular men, into the elemental principles of
natural and corporeal motions. The former work was published by the
Author, and so is out of danger; this by a friend, with leave from him:
and to secure this, you are intreated to consider the relations wherein
it stands, especially to the book _de Cive_. It was thought a part of
religion, not to make any change without the author’s advice, which
could not suddenly be obtained; and so it comes forth innocently,
supposing nothing to have happened since the Dedication of it; which if
it seem a solecism to some, it may to others give satisfaction, in
calling to mind those times and opportunities to which we are indebted
for these admirable compositions.

                                                               F. B.








                                -------




                        TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE

                      WILLIAM, EARL OF NEWCASTLE,

                  GOVERNOR TO THE PRINCE HIS HIGHNESS,

          ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST HONOURABLE PRIVY COUNCIL.

                                  ---

    MY MOST HONOURED LORD,

From the principal parts of Nature, Reason and Passion, have proceeded
two kinds of learning, _mathematical_ and _dogmatical_: the former is
free from controversy and dispute, because it consisteth in comparing
figure and motion only; in which things, _truth_, and _the interest of
men_, oppose not each other: but in the other there is nothing
undisputable, because it compareth men, and meddleth with their right
and profit; in which, as oft as reason is against a man, so oft will a
man be against reason. And from hence it cometh, that they who have
written of justice and policy in general, do all invade each other and
themselves with contradictions. To reduce this doctrine to the rules and
infallibility of reason, there is no way, but, first, put such
principles down for a foundation, as passion, not mistrusting, may not
seek to displace; and afterwards to build thereon the truth of cases in
the law of nature (which hitherto have been built in the air) by
degrees, till the whole have been inexpugnable. Now, my Lord, the
principles fit for such a foundation, are those which heretofore I have
acquainted your Lordship withal in private discourse, and which by your
command I have here put into a method. To examine cases thereby between
_sovereign_ and _sovereign_, or between _sovereign_ and _subject_, I
leave to them that shall find leisure and encouragement thereto. For my
part, I present this to your Lordship for the true and only foundation
of such science. For the style, it is therefore the worse, because,
whilst I was writing, I consulted more with logic than with rhetoric:
but for the doctrine, it is not slightly proved; and the conclusions
thereof of such nature, as, for want of them, government and peace have
been nothing else, to this day, but mutual fears; and it would be an
incomparable benefit to commonwealth, that every one held the opinion
concerning _law_ and _policy_ here delivered. The ambition therefore of
this book, in seeking by your Lordship’s countenance to insinuate itself
with those whom the matter it containeth most nearly concerneth, is to
be excused. For myself, I desire no greater honour than I enjoy already
in your Lordship’s favour, unless it be that you would be pleased, in
continuance thereof, to give me more exercise in your commands; which,
as I am bound by your many great favours, I shall obey, being,

                                   My most honoured Lord,
                          Your most humble and most obliged Servant,
                                              THOMAS HOBBES.

_May 9, 1640._




                       IN LIBELLUM PRÆSTANTISSIMI

                             THOMÆ HOBBII,

                         VIRI VERE PHILOSOPHI,

                          “DE NATURA HOMINIS.”

               Quæ magna cœli mœnia, et tractus maris
             Terræque fines, siquid aut ultra est, capit,
             Mens ipsa tandem capitur: omnia hactenus
             Quæ nosse potuit, nota jam primum est sibi.

               Accede, Lector, disce quis demum sies;
             Et inquilinam jecoris agnoscas tui,
             Qua propius hæret nil tibi, et nil tam procul.

               Non hic scholarum frivola, aut cassi logi,
             Quales per annos forte plus septem legit;
             Ut folle pleno prodeat, rixæ artifex;
             Vanasque merces futili lingua crepet:
             Sed sancta rerum pondera, et sensus graves,
             Quales parari decuit, ipsa cum fuit
             Pingenda ratio, et vindici suo adstitit.

               Panduntur omnes machinæ gyri tuæ,
             Animæque vectes, trochleæ, cunei, rotæ;
             Qua concitetur arte, quo sufflamine
             Sistatur illa rursus, et constet sibi:
             Nec, si fenestram pectori humano suam
             Aptasset ipse Momus, inspiceret magis.
             Hic cerno levia affectuum vestigia,
             Gracilesque sensus lineas; video quibus
             Vehantur alis blanduli cupidines,
             Quibusque stimulis urgeant iræ graves.
             Hic et dolores, et voluptates suos
             Produnt recessus; ipse nec timor latet.

               Has norit artes, quisquis in foro velit
             Animorum habenas flectere, et populos cupit
             Aptis ligatos nexibus jungi sibi.
             Hic Archimedes publicus figat pedem,
             Siquando regna machinis politicis
             Urgere satagit, et feras gentes ciet,
             Imisque motum sedibus mundum quatit:
             Facile domabit cuncta, qui menti imperat.

               Consultor audax, et Promethei potens
             Facinoris anime! quis tibi dedit Deus
             Hæc intueri sæculis longe abdita,
             Oculosque luce tinxit ambrosia tuos?
             Tu mentis omnis, at tuæ nulla est capax.
             Hac laude solus fruere: divinum est opus
             Animam creare; proximum huic, ostendere.

                                               RAD. BATHURST, A.M.
                                                    COL. TRIN. OXON.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                           HUMAN NATURE:

                               OR THE

                        FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS

                             OF POLICY.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER I.

[Sidenote: Introduction.]

1. The true and perspicuous explication of the elements of _laws
natural and politic_ (_which is my present scope_) dependeth upon
the knowledge of what is _human nature_, what is _body politic_, and
what it is we call a _law_; concerning which points, as the
_writings_ of men from antiquity downwards have still increased, so
also have the _doubts_ and _controversies_ concerning the same: and
seeing that true knowledge begetteth not doubt nor controversy, but
knowledge, it is manifest from the present controversies, that they,
which have _heretofore_ written thereof, have not well understood
their own subject.

2. _Harm_ I can do none, though I err no less than they; for I shall
leave men but as they are, in doubt and dispute: but, intending not
to take any principle upon _trust_, but only to put men in mind of
what they _know already_, or _may know_ by their own experience, I
hope to err the less; and when I do, it must proceed from too _hasty
concluding_, which I will endeavour as much as I can to avoid.

3. On the other side, if _reasoning aright_ win not _consent_, which
may very easily happen, from them that being confident of their own
knowledge weigh not what is said, the _fault_ is not mine, but
theirs; for as it is my part to _shew_ my reasons, so it is theirs
to bring _attention_.

4. Man’s _nature_ is the _sum of his natural faculties and powers_,
as the faculties of _nutrition_, _motion_, _generation_, _sense_,
_reason_, _&c._ These powers we do unanimously call _natural_, and
are contained in the definition of man, under these words, _animal_
and _rational_.

5. According to the two principal parts of man, I divide his
faculties into two sorts, faculties of the _body_, and faculties of
the _mind_.

6. Since the minute and distinct anatomy of the powers of the _body_
is nothing necessary to the present purpose, I will only sum them up
in these three heads, power _nutritive_, power _motive_, and power
_generative_.

7. Of the powers of the _mind_ there be two sorts, _cognitive_,
_imaginative_, or _conceptive_ and _motive_; and first of
_cognitive_.

For the understanding of what I mean by the power _cognitive_, we
must remember and acknowledge that there be in our minds continually
certain _images_ or conceptions of the things without us, insomuch
that if a man could be alive, and all the rest of the world
annihilated, he should nevertheless retain the _image_ thereof, and
all those things which he had before seen or perceived in it; every
one by his own experience knowing, that the _absence_ or
_destruction_ of things once imagined doth not cause the _absence_
or _destruction_ of the _imagination_ itself. This _imagery_ and
_representations_ of the qualities of the thing without, is that we
call our _conception_, _imagination_, _ideas_, _notice_ or
_knowledge_ of them; and the _faculty_ or power by which we are
capable of such knowledge, is that I here call _cognitive power_, or
_conceptive_, the power of knowing or conceiving.


                                -------




                              CHAPTER II.

2. Definition of sense. 4. Four propositions concerning the nature
    of conceptions. 5. The first proved. 6. The second proved. 7, 8.
    The third proved. 9. The fourth proved. 10. The main deception
    of sense.


1. Having declared what I mean by the word _conception_, and other
words equivalent thereunto, I come to the _conceptions_ themselves,
to shew their _differences_, their _causes_, and the _manner of the
production_, so far as is necessary for this place.

[Sidenote: Definition of sense.]

2. Originally all _conceptions_ proceed from the _action_ of the
thing itself, whereof it is the conception: now when the action is
_present_, the conception it produceth is also called _sense_; and
the thing by whose action the same is produced, is called the
_object of the sense_.

3. By our several _organs_ we have several _conceptions_ of several
qualities in the objects; for by _sight_ we have a conception or
image composed of _colour_ and _figure_, which is all the notice and
knowledge the object imparteth to us of its nature by the eye. By
_hearing_ we have a conception called _sound_, which is all the
knowledge we have of the quality of the object from the ear. And so
the rest of the senses are also conceptions of several qualities, or
natures of their objects.

[Sidenote: Four propositions concerning the nature of conceptions.]

4. Because the _image_ in vision consisting of _colour_ and _shape_
is the knowledge we have of the qualities of the object of that
sense; it is no hard matter for a man to fall into this opinion,
that the same _colour_ and _shape_ are the _very qualities
themselves_; and for the same cause, that _sound_ and _noise_ are
the _qualities of the bell_, or of the air. And this opinion hath
been so long received, that the _contrary_ must needs appear a great
paradox; and yet the introduction of _species visible_ and
_intelligible_ (which is necessary for the maintenance of that
opinion) passing to and fro from the _object_, is _worse_ than any
paradox, as being a plain _impossibility_. I shall therefore
endeavour to make plain these points:

That the subject wherein colour and image are inherent, is _not_ the
_object_ or thing seen.

That there is nothing _without us_ (really) which we call an _image_
or colour.

That the said image or colour is but an _apparition_ unto us of the
_motion_, agitation, or alteration, which the _object_ worketh in
the _brain_, or spirits, or some internal substance of the head.

That as in _vision_, so also in conceptions that arise from the
_other senses_, the subject of their _inherence_ is not the
_object_, but the _sentient_.

[Sidenote: The first proved]

5. Every man hath so much experience as to have seen the _sun_ and
the other visible objects by reflection in the _water_ and
_glasses_; and this alone is sufficient for this conclusion, that
_colour_ and _image_ may be there where the _thing seen_ is _not_.
But because it may be said that notwithstanding the _image_ in the
water be not in the object, but a thing merely _phantastical_, yet
there may be _colour_ really in the thing itself: I will urge
further this experience, that divers times men see directly the
_same_ object _double_, as _two candles_ for _one_, which may happen
from distemper, or otherwise without distemper if a man will, the
organs being either in their right temper, or equally distempered;
the _colours_ and _figures_ in two such images of the same thing
_cannot be inherent_ therein, because the thing seen cannot be in
_two places_.

_One_ of these images therefore is _not inherent_ in the object: but
seeing the organs of the sight are then in equal temper or
distemper, the _one_ of them is no more inherent than the _other_;
and consequently _neither_ of them both are in the object; which is
the first proposition, mentioned in the precedent number.

[Sidenote: The second proved.]

6. Secondly, that the image of any thing by _reflection_ in a
_glass_ or _water_ or the like, is _not_ any thing _in_ or _behind_
the glass, or _in_ or _under_ the water, every man may grant to
himself; which is the second proposition.

[Sidenote: The third proved.]

7. For the third, we are to consider, first that upon every _great
agitation_ or _concussion_ of the _brain_ (as it happeneth from a
stroke, especially if the stroke be upon the eye) whereby the optic
nerve suffereth any great violence, there _appeareth_ before the
_eyes_ a certain light, which light is _nothing without_, but an
apparition only, all that is real being the concussion or motion of
the parts of that nerve; from which experience we may conclude, that
_apparition of light is really nothing but motion_ within. If
therefore from _lucid bodies_ there can be derived _motion_, so as
to affect the optic nerve in such manner as is proper thereunto,
there will follow an _image_ of light somewhere in that line by
which the motion was last derived to the eye; that is to say, in the
object, if we look directly on it, and in the glass or water, when
we look upon it in the line of reflection, which in effect is the
third proposition; namely, that image and colour is but an
apparition to us of that motion, agitation, or alteration which the
object worketh in the brain or spirits, or some _internal_ substance
in the head.

8. But that _from all lucid_, shining and illuminate bodies, there
is a _motion produced_ to the eye, and, through the eye, to the
_optic_ nerve, and so into the _brain_, by which that apparition of
_light_ or _colour_ is affected, is not hard to prove. And first, it
is evident that the _fire_, the only lucid body here upon earth,
worketh by _motion_ equally every way; insomuch as the motion
thereof _stopped_ or inclosed, it is presently _extinguished_, and
no more fire. And further, that that motion, whereby the fire
worketh, is _dilation_, and _contraction_ of itself _alternately_,
commonly called _scintillation_ or glowing, is manifest also by
experience. From such _motion_ in the fire must needs arise a
_rejection_ or casting from itself of that part of the _medium_
which is _contiguous_ to it, whereby that part also rejecteth the
_next_, and so successively one part beateth back another to the
very _eye_; and in the same manner the _exterior_ part of the eye
presseth the _interior_, (the laws of refraction still observed).
Now the interior coat of the eye is nothing else but a piece of the
_optic_ nerve; and therefore the motion is still continued thereby
into the _brain_, and by _resistance_ or reaction of the brain, is
also a _rebound_ into the optic nerve again; which we _not
conceiving_ as motion or rebound from _within_, do think it is
_without_, and call it _light_; as hath been already shewed by the
experience of a stroke. We have no reason to doubt, that the
fountain of light, the _sun_, worketh by any other ways than the
_fire_, at least in this matter. And thus all _vision_ hath its
original from such _motion_ as is here described: for where there is
no light, there is no sight; and therefore _colour_ also must be the
same thing with _light_, as being the effect of the lucid bodies:
their _difference_ being only this, that when the light cometh
_directly_ from the fountain to the eye, or _indirectly_ by
reflection from _clean_ and _polite_ bodies, and such as have _not_
any particular motion internal to alter it, we call it _light_; but
when it cometh to the eye by reflection from _uneven_, _rough_, and
coarse bodies, or such as are affected with internal motion of their
own that may alter it, then we call it _colour_; colour and light
differing only in this, that the one is _pure_, and the other
_perturbed_ light. By that which hath been said, not only the truth
of the third proposition, but also the whole manner of producing
light and colour, is apparent.

[Sidenote: The fourth proved.]

9. As colour is not inherent in the object, but an effect thereof
upon us, caused by such motion in the object, as hath been
described: so neither is _sound_ in the thing we hear, but in
ourselves. One manifest sign thereof is, that as a man may _see_, so
also he may _hear double_ or _treble_, by multiplication of
_echoes_, which echoes are sounds as well as the original; and _not_
being in one and the _same place_, cannot be _inherent_ in the body
that maketh them. Nothing can make any thing which is not in itself:
the _clapper_ hath no _sound_ in it, but _motion_, and maketh motion
in the internal parts of the bell; so the _bell_ hath motion, and
not sound, that imparteth _motion_ to the _air_; and the _air_ hath
motion, but not sound; the _air_ imparteth motion by the _ear_ and
_nerve_ unto the _brain_; and the brain hath motion but not sound;
from the _brain_, it reboundeth back into the nerves _outward_, and
thence it becometh an _apparition without_, which we call _sound_.
And to proceed to the _rest_ of the _senses_, it is apparent enough,
that the _smell_ and _taste_ of the _same thing_, are _not_ the
_same_ to _every man_; and therefore are not in the thing _smelt_ or
_tasted_, but in the men. So likewise the _heat_ we feel from the
fire is manifestly in _us_, and is quite _different_ from the heat
which is in the _fire_: for _our_ heat is _pleasure_ or _pain_,
according as it is _great_ or _moderate_; but in the _coal_ there is
no such thing. By this the fourth and last proposition is proved,
_viz._ that as in vision, so also in conceptions that arise from
_other_ senses, the subject of their inherence is not in the object,
but in the sentient.

[Sidenote: The main deception of sense.]

10. And from hence also it followeth, that _whatsoever accidents_ or
qualities our senses make us think there be in the _world_, they be
_not_ there, but are _seeming_ and _apparitions_ only: the things
that really _are_ in the world without us, are those _motions_ by
which these seemings are caused. And this is the _great deception of
sense_, which also is to be by sense _corrected_: for as sense
telleth me, when I see _directly_, that the colour seemeth to _be_
in the object; so also sense telleth me, when I see by _reflection_,
that colour is not in the object.


                                -------




                              CHAPTER III.

1. Imagination defined. 2. Sleep and dreams defined. 3. Causes of
    dreams. 4. Fiction defined. 5. Phantasms defined. 6. Remembrance
    defined. 7. Wherein remembrance consisteth. 8. Why in a dream a
    man never thinks he dreams. 9. Why few things seem strange in
    dreams. 10. That a dream may be taken for reality and vision.


[Sidenote: Imagination defined.]

1. As standing water put into motion by the stroke of a _stone_, or
blast of wind, doth _not presently_ give over moving as soon as the
wind ceaseth, or the stone settleth: so _neither_ doth the _effect_
cease which the _object_ hath wrought upon the _brain_, so soon as
ever by turning aside of the organs the _object ceaseth_ to work;
that is to say, though the _sense_ be _past_, the _image_ or
_conception_ remaineth; but more _obscure_ while we are _awake_,
because some _object_ or other continually _plieth_ and soliciteth
our eyes, and ears, _keeping_ the mind in a _stronger_ motion,
whereby the _weaker_ doth not easily _appear_. And this obscure
conception is that we call _phantasy_, or _imagination_:
_imagination_ being, to define it, _conception remaining, and by
little and little decaying from and after the act of sense_.

[Sidenote: Sleep and dreams defined.]

2. But when _present_ sense is _not_, as in _sleep_, there the
_images_ remaining after sense, when there be many, as in dreams,
are _not obscure_, but _strong_ and _clear_, as in sense itself. The
reason is, that which obscured and made the conceptions weak, namely
sense, and present _operation_ of the object, is _removed_: for
_sleep_ is the _privation of the act of sense_, (the power
remaining) and _dreams_ are the _imagination_ of them that _sleep_.

[Sidenote: Causes of dreams.]

3. The _causes_ of dreams, if they be natural, are the _actions_ or
violence of the _inward_ parts of a man upon his _brain_, by which
the _passages_ of sense by sleep _benumbed_, are _restored_ to their
motion. The signs by which this appeareth to be so, are the
_differences_ of dreams (old men commonly dream oftener, and have
their dreams more painful than young) proceeding from the
_different_ accidents of man’s body, as dreams of _lust_, as dreams
of _anger_, according as the heart, or other parts within, work more
or less upon the brain, by more or less _heat_; so also the descents
of different _sorts of phlegm_ maketh us a dream of different tastes
of meats and drinks; and I believe there is a _reciprocation_ of
motion from the brain to the vital parts, and back from the vital
parts to the brain; whereby not only _imagination_ begetteth
_motion_ in those parts; but also motion in those parts begetteth
imagination like to that by which it was begotten. If this be true,
and that _sad_ imaginations nourish the _spleen_, then we see also a
cause, why a strong _spleen_ reciprocally causeth _fearful dreams_,
and why the effects of _lasciviousness_ may in a dream produce the
image of some person that had _caused_ them. Another sign that
dreams are caused by the action of the inward parts, is the
_disorder_ and casual consequence of one conception or image to
another: for when we are _waking_, the _antecedent_ thought or
conception introduceth, and is cause of the _consequent_, as the
water followeth a man’s finger upon a dry and level table; but in
_dreams_ there is commonly _no coherence_, and when there is, it is
by chance, which must needs proceed from this, that the _brain_ in
dreams is _not restored_ to its motion in every part alike; whereby
it cometh to pass, that our thoughts appear like the stars between
the flying clouds, not in the order which a man would choose to
observe them, but as the uncertain flight of broken clouds permits.

[Sidenote: Fiction defined.]

4. As when the _water_, or any liquid thing moved at once by
_divers_ movents, receiveth _one_ motion compounded of them all; so
also the _brain_ or spirit therein, having been stirred by _divers_
objects, composeth an imagination of _divers_ conceptions that
appeared single to the sense. As for example, the sense sheweth at
one time the figure of a _mountain_, and at another time the colour
of _gold_; but the imagination afterwards hath them both at once in
a _golden mountain_. From the same cause it is, there appear unto us
_castles_ in the _air_, _chimeras_, and other monsters which are
_not_ in _rerum natura_, _but_ have been conceived by the sense in
pieces at several times. And this composition is that which we
commonly call _fiction_ of the mind.

[Sidenote: Phantasms defined.]

5. There is yet another kind of imagination, which for _clearness
contendeth_ with _sense_, as well as a _dream_; and that is, when
the _action_ of sense hath been _long_ or _vehement_: and the
experience thereof is more frequent in the sense of seeing, than the
rest. An example whereof is, the _image_ remaining before the _eye_
after looking upon the _sun_. Also, those little images that appear
before the eyes in the _dark_ (whereof I think every man hath
experience, but they most of all, who are _timorous_ or
superstitious) are examples of the same. And these, for
distinction-sake, may be called _phantasms_.

[Sidenote: Remembrance defined.]

6. By the _senses_, which are numbered according to the _organs_ to
be _five_, we take notice (as hath been said already) of the objects
_without_ us; and that _notice_ is our _conception_ thereof: but we
take _notice_ also some way or other _of our conceptions_: for when
the conception of the same thing cometh _again_, we take notice that
it is _again_; that is to say, that we have had the same conception
_before_; which is as much as to imagine a thing _past_; which is
impossible to the _sense_, which is only of things _present_. This
therefore may be accounted a _sixth sense_, but _internal_, (not
_external_, as the rest) and is commonly called _remembrance_.

[Sidenote: Wherein remembrance consisteth.]

7. For the _manner_ by which we take notice of a conception _past_,
we are to remember, that in the _definition_ of _imagination_, it is
said to be a conception by _little_ and _little decaying_, or
growing more _obscure_. An _obscure_ conception is that which
representeth the _whole object_ together, but _none_ of the _smaller
parts_ by themselves; and as _more_ or _fewer_ parts be represented,
so is the conception or representation said to be _more_ or _less
clear_. Seeing then the _conception_, which when it was _first_
produced by sense, was _clear_, and represented the _parts_ of the
object _distinctly_; and when it cometh _again_ is _obscure_, we
find _missing_ somewhat that we expected; by which we judge it
_past_ and _decayed_. For example, a man that is present in a
foreign _city_, seeth not only _whole_ streets, but can also
distinguish particular _houses_, and _parts_ of houses; but departed
thence, he cannot distinguish them so particularly in his mind as he
did, some _house_ or turning escaping him; yet is this to
_remember_: when _afterwards_ there escape him _more_ particulars,
this is also to _remember_, but _not_ so well. In process of time,
the _image_ of the city _returneth_ but as a _mass_ of building
_only_, which is _almost_ to have _forgotten_ it. Seeing then
remembrance is _more_ or _less_, as we find more or less
_obscurity_, why may not we well think _remembrance_ to be nothing
else but the _missing of parts_, which every man expecteth should
succeed after they have a conception of the whole? To see at a great
distance of place, and to remember at a great distance of time, is
to have like conceptions of the thing: for there wanteth distinction
of parts in both; the one conception being weak by operation at
distance, the other by decay.

[Sidenote: Why in a dream a man never thinks he dreams.]

8. And from this that hath been said, there followeth, that a man
can _never know_ he _dreameth_; he _may_ dream he _doubteth_,
whether it be a dream or no: but the clearness of the imagination
representeth every thing with as many parts as doth sense itself,
and consequently, he can take notice of nothing but as present;
whereas to think he dreameth, is to think those his conceptions,
that is to say dreams, obscurer than they were in the sense: so that
he must think them both as clear, and not as clear as sense; which
is impossible.

[Sidenote: Why few things seem strange in dreams.]

9. From the same ground it proceedeth, that men _wonder not_ in
their dreams at place and persons, as they would do waking: for
waking, a man would think it strange to be in a place where he never
was before, and remember nothing of how he came there; but in a
dream, there cometh little of that kind into consideration. The
_clearness_ of conception in a dream, taketh away _distrust_, unless
the _strangeness_ be _excessive_, as to think himself fallen from on
high without hurt, and then most commonly he _waketh_.

[Sidenote: That a dream may be taken for reality and vision.]

10. Nor is it _impossible_ for a man to be so far deceived, as when
his dream is _past_, to think it real: for if he dream of such
things as are ordinarily in his mind, and in such order as he useth
to do waking, and withal that he laid him down to sleep in the place
where he findeth himself when he awaketh; all which may happen: I
know no κριτήριον or mark by which he can discern whether it were a
dream or not, and therefore do the less wonder to hear a man
sometimes to tell his dream for a truth, or to take it for a vision.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER IV.

1. Discourse. 2. The cause of coherence of thoughts. 3. Ranging. 4.
    Sagacity. 5. Reminiscence. 6. Experience. 7. Expectation. 8.
    Conjecture. 9. Signs. 10. Prudence. 11. Caveats of concluding
    from experience.


[Sidenote: Discourse.]

1. The _succession_ of conceptions in the mind, series or
consequence of one after another, may be _casual_ and incoherent, as
in dreams for the most part; and it may be _orderly_, as when the
former thought introduceth the latter; and this is _discourse_ of
the mind. But because the word discourse is commonly taken for the
_coherence_ and consequence of words, I will, to avoid equivocation,
call it _discursion_.

[Sidenote: The cause of coherence of thoughts.]

2. The _cause_ of the _coherence_ or consequence of one conception
to another, is their first _coherence_ or consequence at that _time_
when they are produced by sense: as for example, from St. Andrew the
mind runneth to St. Peter, because their names are read together;
from St. Peter to a _stone_, for the same cause; from _stone_ to
_foundation_, because we see them together; and for the same cause,
from foundation to _church_, and from church to _people_, and from
people to _tumult_: and according to this example, the mind may run
almost from anything to anything. But as in the _sense_ the
conception of cause and effect may succeed one another; so may they
after sense in the _imagination_: and for the most part they do so;
the _cause_ whereof is the _appetite_ of them, who, having a
conception of the _end_, have next unto it a conception of the next
_means_ to that end: as, when a man, from a thought of _honour_ to
which he hath an appetite, cometh to the thought of _wisdom_, which
is the next means thereunto; and from thence to the thought of
_study_, which is the next means to wisdom.

[Sidenote: Ranging.]

3. To omit that kind of discursion by which we proceed from anything
to anything, there are of the _other_ kind _divers_ sorts: as first,
in the _senses_ there are certain coherences of conceptions, which
we may call _ranging_; examples whereof are; a man casteth his _eye_
upon the _ground_, to look about for some _small_ thing lost; the
_hounds_ casting about at a fault in hunting; and the _ranging_ of
spaniels: and herein we take a beginning arbitrary.

[Sidenote: Sagacity.]

4. Another sort of discursion is, when the _appetite_ giveth a man
his beginning, as in the example before, where honour to which a man
hath appetite, maketh him think upon the next means of attaining it,
and that again of the next, &c. And this the Latins call
_sagacitas_, and we may call _hunting_ or _tracing_, as dogs trace
beasts by the smell, and men hunt them by their footsteps; or as men
hunt after riches, place, or knowledge.

[Sidenote: Reminiscence.]

5. There is yet another kind of discursion beginning with the
appetite to _recover_ something lost, proceeding from the _present
backward_, from thought of the place where we _miss_ at, to the
thought of the place from whence we came _last_; and from the
thought of that, to the thought of a place _before_, till we have in
our mind some place, wherein we had the thing we miss: and this is
called _reminiscence_.

[Sidenote: Experience.]

6. The _remembrance_ of succession of one thing to another, that is,
of what was _antecedent_, and what _consequent_, and what
_concomitant_, is called an _experiment_; whether the same be made
by us _voluntarily_, as when a man putteth any thing into the fire,
to see what effect the fire will produce upon it: or _not_ made by
us, as when we remember a fair morning after a red evening. To have
had many _experiments_, is that we call _experience_, which is
nothing else but _remembrance_ of what antecedents have been
followed by what consequents.

[Sidenote: Expectation.]

7. No man can have in his mind a conception of the _future_, for the
future is _not yet_: but of our conceptions of the _past_, we make a
_future_; or rather, call _past_, _future_ relatively. Thus after a
man hath been accustomed to see like antecedents followed by like
consequents, whensoever he seeth the like come to pass to any thing
he had seen before, he looks there should follow it the same that
followed then: as for example, because a man hath often seen
offences followed by punishment, when he seeth an offence in
present, he thinketh punishment to be consequent thereto; but
consequent unto that which is present, men call future; and thus we
make _remembrance_ to be the _prevision_ of things to come, or
_expectation_ or presumption of the future.

[Sidenote: Conjecture.]

8. In the same manner, if a man seeth in present that which he hath
seen before, he thinks that that which was antecedent to that which
he saw before, is also antecedent to that he presently seeth: as for
example, he that hath seen the ashes remain after the fire, and now
again seeth ashes, concludeth again there hath been fire: and this
is called again _conjecture_ of the past, or presumption of the
fact.

[Sidenote: Signs.]

9. When a man hath _so often_ observed like antecedents to be
followed by like consequents, that _whensoever_ he seeth the
antecedent, he looketh again for the consequent; or when he seeth
the consequent, maketh account there hath been the like antecedent;
then he calleth both the antecedent and the consequent, _signs_ one
of another, as clouds are signs of rain to come, and rain of clouds
past.

[Sidenote: Prudence.]

10. This taking of signs by _experience_, is that wherein men do
ordinarily think, the difference stands between man and man in
_wisdom_, by which they commonly understand a man’s whole ability or
_power cognitive_; but this is an _error_: for the signs are but
_conjectural_; and according as they have often or seldom failed, so
their _assurance_ is more or less; but _never full_ and _evident_:
for though a man have always seen the day and night to follow one
another hitherto; yet can he not thence conclude they shall do so,
or that they have done so eternally: _experience concludeth nothing
universally_. If the signs hit twenty times for one missing, a man
may lay a wager of twenty to one of the event; but may not conclude
it for a truth. But by this it is plain, that they shall _conjecture
best_, that have _most experience_, because they have most signs to
conjecture by: which is the reason _old men_ are _more prudent_,
that is, conjecture better, _cæteris paribus_, than young: for,
being old, they remember more; and experience is but remembrance.
And _men_ of _quick_ imagination, _cæteris paribus_, are more
_prudent_ than those whose imaginations are slow: for they observe
_more_ in _less_ time. Prudence is nothing but conjecture from
experience, or taking of signs from experience warily, that is, that
the experiments from which he taketh such signs be all remembered;
for else the cases are not alike that seem so.

[Sidenote: Caveats of concluding from experience.]

11. As in conjecture concerning things past and future, it is
prudence to conclude from experience, what is like to come to pass,
or to have passed already; so it is an error to conclude from it,
that _it is_ so or so _called_; that is to say, we cannot from
experience conclude, that any thing is to be called _just_ or
_unjust_, _true_ or _false_, or any proposition _universal_
whatsoever, except it be from remembrance of the use of names
imposed arbitrarily by men: for example, to have heard a sentence
given in the like case, the like sentence a thousand times is not
enough to conclude that the sentence is just; though most men have
no other means to conclude by: but it is _necessary_, for the
drawing of such conclusion, to _trace_ and _find out_, by many
experiences, what men do mean by calling things just and unjust.
Further, there is another _caveat_ to be taken in concluding by
experience, from the tenth section of the second chapter; that is,
that we conclude such things to be without, that are within us.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER V.

1. Of marks. 2. Names or appellations. 3. Names positive and
    privative. 4. Advantage of names maketh us capable of science.
    5. Names universal and singular. 6. Universals not in _rerum
    natura_. 7. Equivocal names. 8. Understanding. 9. Affirmation,
    negation, proposition. 10. Truth, falsity. 11. Ratiocination.
    12. According to reason, against reason. 13. Names causes of
    knowledge, so of error. 14. Translation of the discourse of the
    mind into the discourse of the tongue, and of the errors thence
    proceeding.


[Sidenote: Of marks.]

1. Seeing the _succession_ of conceptions in the _mind_ are caused,
as hath been said before, by the succession they _had_ one to
another when they were produced by the _senses_, and that there is
no conception that hath not been produced immediately before or
after innumerable others, by the innumerable acts of sense; it must
needs follow, that one _conception_ followeth _not_ another,
according to our election, and the need we have of them, _but_ as it
_chanceth_ us to hear or see such things as shall bring them to our
mind. The experience we have hereof, is in such brute beasts, which,
having the providence to hide the remains and superfluity of their
meat, do nevertheless want the remembrance of the place where they
hid it, and thereby make no benefit thereof in their hunger: but
man, who in this point beginneth to rank himself somewhat above the
nature of beasts, hath observed and remembered the cause of this
defect, and to amend the same, hath imagined or devised to set up a
visible or other sensible mark, the which, when he seeth it again,
may bring to his mind the thought he had when he set it up. A _mark_
therefore is a _sensible object_ which a man erecteth voluntarily to
himself, to the end to _remember_ thereby somewhat past, when the
same is objected to his sense again: as men that have passed by a
rock at sea, set up some mark, thereby to remember their former
danger, and avoid it.

[Sidenote: Names or appellations.]

2. In the number of these _marks_, are those _human voices_, which
we call the _names_ or appellations of things sensible by the ear,
by which we recall into our mind some conceptions of the things to
which we gave those names or appellations; as the appellation
_white_ bringeth to remembrance the quality of such objects as
produce that colour or conception in us. A _name_ or appellation
therefore is the _voice_ of a man _arbitrary_, imposed for a _mark_
to bring into his mind some conception concerning the thing on which
it is imposed.

[Sidenote: Names positive and privative.]

3. Things named, are either the _objects_ themselves, as a man; or
the _conception_ itself that we have of man, as shape and motion: or
some privation, which is when we conceive that there is something
which we conceive, not in him; as when we conceive he is not just,
not finite, we give him the name of unjust, of infinite, which
signify privation or defect; and to the privations themselves we
give the names of injustice and infiniteness: so that here be _two
sorts_ of names; one of _things_, in which we conceive something; or
of the conceptions themselves, which are called _positive_: the
other of things wherein we conceive _privation_ or defect, and those
names are called _privative_.

[Sidenote: Advantage of names maketh us capable of science.]

4. By the advantage of _names_ it is that we are capable of
_science_, which beasts, for want of them are not; nor man, without
the use of them: for as a beast misseth not one or two out of many
her young ones, for want of those names of order, one, two, and
three, and which we call _number_; so neither would a man, without
repeating orally or mentally the words of number, know how many
pieces of money or other things lie before him.

[Sidenote: Names universal and singular.]

5. Seeing there be _many_ conceptions of _one_ and the same thing,
and for _every_ conception we give it a _several_ name; it followeth
that for one and the same thing, we have many names or attributes;
as to the same man we give the appellations of _just_, _valiant_,
&c. for divers _virtues_; of _strong_, _comely_, &c. for divers
_qualities_ of the _body_. And again, because from divers things we
receive like conceptions, many things must needs have the same
appellation: as to all things we _see_, we give the same name of
_visible_; and to all things we _see moveable_, we give the
appellation of _moveable_: and those names we give to _many_, are
called _universal_ to them all; as the name of man to every
particular of mankind: such appellation as we give to _one_ only
thing, we call _individual_, or singular; as Socrates, and other
proper names: or, by circumlocution, he that writ the _Iliads_, for
Homer.

[Sidenote: Universals not in _rerum natura_.]

6. The universality of _one name_ to many things, hath been the
cause that men think the _things_ are themselves universal; and so
seriously contend, that besides Peter and John, and all the rest of
the men that are, have been, or shall be in the world, there is yet
something else that we call _man_, viz. _man in general_, deceiving
themselves, by taking the universal, or general appellation, for the
thing it signifieth: for if one should desire the painter to make
him the picture of a man, which is as much as to say, of a man in
general; he meaneth no more, but that the painter should choose what
man he pleaseth to draw, which must needs be some of them that are,
or have been, or may be, none of which are _universal_. But when he
would have him to draw the picture of the king, or any particular
person, he limiteth the painter to that one person he chooseth. It
is plain therefore, that there is _nothing universal_ but _names_;
which are therefore called _indefinite_; because we limit them not
ourselves, but leave them to be applied by the hearer: whereas a
singular name is limited and restrained to one of the many things it
signifieth; as when we say, this man, pointing to him, or giving him
his proper name, or by some such other way.

[Sidenote: Equivocal names.]

7. The appellations that be _universal_, and common to many
things, are _not_ always given to all the _particulars_, (as they
ought to be) for like conceptions, and like considerations in them
all; which is the cause that many of them are _not_ of _constant_
signification, but bring into our mind other thoughts than those
for which they were ordained, and these are called equivocal. As
for example, the word faith signifieth the same with belief;
sometimes it signifieth particularly that belief which maketh a
Christian; and sometime it signifieth the keeping of a promise.
Also all _metaphors_ are by profession _equivocal_: and there is
scarce any word that is not made _equivocal_ by divers contextures
of speech, or by diversity of pronunciation and gesture.

[Sidenote: Understanding.]

8. This _equivocation_ of names maketh it _difficult_ to recover
those conceptions for which the name was ordained; and that not only
in the language of other men, wherein we are to consider the
_drift_, and _occasion_, and _contexture_ of the speech, as well as
the _words_ themselves; but also in our discourse, which being
derived from the custom and common use of speech, representeth unto
us not our own conceptions. It is therefore a great ability in a
man, out of the words, contexture, and other circumstances of
language, to deliver himself from _equivocation_, and to find out
the true meaning of what is said: and this is it we call
_understanding_.

[Sidenote: Affirmation, negation, proposition.]

9. Of two _appellations_, by the help of this little verb _is_, or
something equivalent, we make an _affirmation_ or _negation_, either
of which in the Schools we call also a _proposition_, and consisteth
of two appellations joined together by the said verb _is_: as for
example, man is a living creature; or thus, man is not righteous:
whereof the former is called an _affirmation_, because the
appellation, living creature, is _positive_; the latter a
_negative_, because not righteous is _privative_.

[Sidenote: Truth, falsity.]

10. In _every proposition_, be it affirmative or negative, the
latter appellation either comprehendeth the former, as in this
proposition, charity is a virtue, the name of virtue comprehendeth
the name of charity, and many other virtues beside; and then is the
proposition said to be _true_, or _truth_: for, _truth_, and a _true
proposition_, is all one. Or _else_ the _latter_ appellation
comprehendeth _not_ the former; as in this proposition, every man is
just; the name of just comprehendeth not every man; for unjust is
the name of the far greater part of men: and the proposition is said
to be _false_, or falsity: _falsity_ and a _false proposition_ being
also the same thing.

[Sidenote: Ratiocination.]

11. In what manner of two propositions, whether _both_ affirmative,
or _one_ affirmative, the _other_ negative, is made a _syllogism_, I
forbear to write. All this that hath been said of names or
propositions, though _necessary_, is but _dry_ discourse: and this
place is not for the whole art of logic, which if I enter further
into, I ought to pursue: besides, it is not needful; for there be
few men which have not so much natural logic, as thereby to discern
well enough, whether any conclusion I shall make in this discourse
hereafter, be well or ill collected: only thus much I say in this
place, that _making of syllogisms_ is that we call _ratiocination_
or _reasoning_.

[Sidenote: According to reason, against reason.]

12. Now when a man _reasoneth_ from _principles_ that are _found_
indubitable by experience, all deceptions of sense and equivocation
of words avoided, the conclusion he maketh is said to be _according
to right reason_: but when from his conclusion a man may, by good
ratiocination, derive that which is _contradictory_ to any evident
truth whatsoever, then he is said to have concluded _against
reason_: and such a conclusion is called _absurdity_.

[Sidenote: Names causes of knowledge, so of error.]

13. As the _invention_ of _names_ hath been _necessary_ for the
drawing men _out of_ ignorance, by calling to their remembrance the
necessary _coherence_ of one conception to another; so also hath it
on the other side precipitated men into _error_: insomuch, that
whereas by the benefit of _words_ and ratiocination they exceed
_brute beasts_ in knowledge, and the commodities that accompany the
same; so they exceed them also in _error_: for _true_ and _false_
are things not incident to beasts, because they adhere not to
propositions and language; nor have they ratiocination, whereby to
multiply one untruth by another, as men have.

[Sidenote: Translation of the discourse of the mind into the
           discourse of the tongue, and of the errors thence
           proceeding.]

14. It is the _nature_ almost of every _corporal_ thing, being
_often moved_ in one and the same manner, to receive continually a
_greater_ and _greater easiness_ and aptitude to the _same_ motion,
insomuch as in time the same becometh so _habitual_, that, to
_beget_ it, there needs no more than to _begin_ it. The _passions_
of man, as they are the beginning of _voluntary_ motions; so are
they the beginning of _speech_, which is the motion of the tongue.
And men desiring to shew others the knowledge, opinions,
conceptions, and passions which are in themselves, and to that end
having invented _language_, have by that means transferred all that
_discursion_ of their _mind_ mentioned in the former chapter, by the
_motion_ of their _tongues_, into _discourse_ of _words_: and
_ratio_ now is but _oratio_, for the most part, wherein custom hath
so great a power, that the mind suggesteth only the first word; the
rest follow _habitually_, and are not followed by the mind; as it is
with beggars, when they say their _paternoster_, putting together
such words, and in such manner, as in their education they have
learned from their nurses, from their companies, or from their
teachers, having _no images_ or _conceptions_ in their mind,
answering to the words they speak: and as they have learned
themselves, so they teach posterity. Now, if we consider the power
of those _deceptions_ of the sense, mentioned chapter II. section
10, and also how _unconstantly_ names have been settled, and how
subject they are to _equivocation_, and how _diversified_ by
_passion_, (scarce two men agreeing what is to be called good, and
what evil; what liberality, what prodigality; what valour, what
temerity) and how subject men are to paralogism or fallacy in
reasoning, I may in a manner conclude, that it is impossible to
_rectify_ so many errors of any one man, as must needs proceed from
those causes, without beginning _anew_ from the very first grounds
of all our knowledge and sense; and instead of books, reading over
orderly one’s own conceptions: in which meaning, I take _nosce te
ipsum_ for a precept worthy the reputation it hath gotten.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER VI.

1. Of the two kinds of knowledge. 2. Truth and evidence necessary to
    knowledge. 3. Evidence defined. 4. Science defined. 5.
    Supposition defined. 6. Opinion defined. 7. Belief defined. 8.
    Conscience defined. 9. Belief, in some cases, no less from doubt
    than knowledge.


[Sidenote: Of the two kinds of knowledge.]

1. There is a story somewhere, of one that pretends to have been
miraculously cured of blindness, wherewith he was born, by St. Alban
or other Saints, at the town of St. Alban’s; and that the Duke of
Gloucester being there, to be satisfied of the truth of the miracle,
asked the man, What colour is this? who, by answering, it was green,
discovered himself, and was punished for a counterfeit: for though
by his sight newly received he might distinguish between green, and
red, and all other colours, as well as any that should interrogate
him, yet he could not possibly know at first sight which of them was
called green, or red, or by any other name. By this we may
understand, there be _two kinds_ of knowledge, whereof the _one_ is
nothing else but _sense_, or knowledge _original_, as I have said in
the beginning of the second chapter, and _remembrance_ of the same;
the _other_ is called _science_ or knowledge of the _truth of
propositions_, and how things are called, and is derived from
_understanding_. Both of these sorts are but _experience_; the
former being the experience of the effects of things that work upon
us from _without_; and the latter experience men have from the
proper use of _names_ in language: and all experience being, as I
have said, but remembrance, all knowledge is remembrance: and of the
_former_, the register we keep in books, is called _history_; but
the registers of the _latter_ are called the _sciences_.

[Sidenote: Truth and evidence necessary to knowledge.]

2. There are _two things_ necessarily implied in this word
_knowledge_; the one is _truth_, the other _evidence_; for what is
not truth, can never be known. For, let a man say he knoweth a thing
never so well, if the same shall afterwards appear false, he is
driven to confession, that it was not knowledge, but opinion.
Likewise, if the truth be not evident, though a man holdeth it, yet
is his knowledge thereof no more than theirs who hold the contrary:
for if truth were enough to make it knowledge, all truth were known;
which is not so.

[Sidenote: Evidence defined.]

3. What _truth_ is, hath been defined in the precedent chapter; what
_evidence_ is, I _now_ set down: and it is the concomitance of a
man’s _conception_ with the _words_ that signify such conception in
the act of ratiocination: for when a man reasoneth with his lips
only, to which the mind suggesteth only the beginning, and followeth
not the words of his mouth with the conceptions of his mind, out of
custom of so speaking; though he begin his ratiocination with true
propositions, and proceed with certain syllogisms, and thereby make
always true conclusions; yet are not his conclusions _evident_ to
him, for want of the _concomitance of conception_ with his words:
for if the words alone were sufficient, a _parrot_ might be taught
as well to know truth, as to speak it. Evidence is to truth, as the
sap to the tree, which, so far as it creepeth along with the body
and branches, keepeth them alive; where it forsaketh them, they die:
for this evidence, which is meaning with our words, is the life of
truth.

[Sidenote: Science defined.]

4. Knowledge thereof, which we call _science_, I define to be
_evidence of truth_, from some beginning or principle of _sense_:
for the truth of a proposition is never evident, until we conceive
the meaning of the words or terms whereof it consisteth, which are
always conceptions of the mind: nor can we remember those
conceptions, without the thing that produced the same by our senses.
The _first_ principle of knowledge is, that we have such and such
_conceptions_; the _second_, that we have thus and thus _named_ the
things whereof they are conceptions; the _third_ is, that we have
_joined_ those _names_ in such manner as to make true propositions;
the _fourth_ and last is, that we have _joined_ those _propositions_
in such manner as they be concluding, and the truth of the
conclusion said to be known. And of these two kinds of knowledge,
whereof the former is _experience of fact_, and the latter _evidence
of truth_; as the _former_, if it be great, is called _prudence_; so
the _latter_, if it be much, hath usually been called, both by
ancient and modern writers, _sapience_ or wisdom: and of this
_latter_, _man_ only is capable; of the _former_, _brute beasts_
also participate.

[Sidenote: Supposition defined.]

5. A proposition is said to be _supposed_, when, being _not
evident_, it is nevertheless _admitted for a time_, to the end,
that, joining to it other propositions, we may _conclude_ something;
and to _proceed_ from conclusion to conclusion, for a _trial_
whether the same will lead us into any _absurd_ or impossible
conclusion; which if it _do_, then we know such supposition to have
been false.

[Sidenote: Opinion defined.]

6. But if running through _many_ conclusions, we come to _none_ that
are _absurd_, then we think the proposition _probable_; likewise we
think probable whatsoever proposition we _admit_ for truth by error
of reasoning, or from trusting to other men: and all such
propositions as are admitted by _trust_ or error, we are not said to
_know_, but to _think_ them to be true; and the admittance of them
is called _opinion_.

[Sidenote: Belief defined.]

7. And particularly, when the opinion is admitted out of _trust_ to
_other_ men, they are said to _believe_ it; and their admittance of
it is called _belief_, and sometimes _faith_.

[Sidenote: Conscience defined.]

8. It is either _science_ or _opinion_ which we commonly mean by the
word _conscience_: for men say that such and such a thing is true in
or upon their conscience; which they _never_ do, when they think it
_doubtful_; and therefore they _know_, or _think_ they know it to be
true. But men, when they say things upon their conscience, are not
therefore presumed certainly to know the truth of what they say; it
remaineth then, that that word is used by them that have an
_opinion_, _not_ only of the _truth_ of the thing, _but_ also of
their _knowledge_ of it, to which the _truth_ of the proposition is
consequent. _Conscience_ I therefore define to be _opinion of
evidence_.

[Sidenote: Belief, in some cases, no less from doubt than
           knowledge.]

9. _Belief_, which is the admitting of propositions upon _trust_, in
many cases is no less free from _doubt_, than perfect and manifest
_knowledge_: for as there is nothing whereof there is not some
cause; so, when there is doubt, there must be some cause thereof
conceived. Now there be many things which we receive from _report of
others_, of which it is impossible to imagine any cause of _doubt_:
for what can be opposed against the consent of all men, in things
they can know, and have no cause to report otherwise than they are,
such as is a great part of our _histories_, unless a man would say
that all the world had _conspired_ to deceive him.

And thus much of _sense_, _imagination_, _discursion_,
_ratiocination_, and _knowledge_, which are the acts of our _power
cognitive_, or _conceptive_. That power of the _mind_ which we call
_motive_, differeth from the power _motive_ of the _body_; for the
power _motive_ of the _body_ is that by which it _moveth other_
bodies, and we call _strength_: but the power motive of the _mind_,
is that by which the mind giveth _animal motion_ to that _body_
wherein it existeth; the acts hereof are our _affections_ and
_passions_, of which I am to speak in general.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER VII.

1. Of delight, pain, love, hatred. 2. Appetite, aversion, fear. 3.
    Good, evil, pulchritude, turpitude. 4. End, fruition. 5.
    Profitable, use, vain. 6. Felicity. 7. Good and evil mixed. 8.
    Sensual delight, and pain; joy and grief.


[Sidenote: Of delight, pain, love, hatred.]

1. In the eighth section of the second chapter is shewed, _that
conceptions_ and _apparitions_ are nothing _really_, but _motion_ in
some internal substance of the _head_; which motion _not stopping_
there, but proceeding to the _heart_, of necessity must there either
_help_ or _hinder_ the motion which is called _vital_; when it
_helpeth_, it is called _delight_, _contentment_, or _pleasure_,
which is nothing really but motion about the heart, as conception is
nothing but motion in the head: and the _objects_ that cause it are
called _pleasant_ or _delightful_, or by some name equivalent; the
Latins have _jucundum_, _a juvando_, from helping; and the same
delight, with reference to the object, is called _love_: but when
such motion _weakeneth_ or hindereth the vital motion, then it is
called _pain_; and in relation to that which causeth it, hatred,
which the Latins express sometimes by _odium_, and sometimes by
_tædium_.

[Sidenote: Appetite, aversion, fear.]

2. This motion, in which consisteth _pleasure_ or _pain_, is also a
_solicitation_ or provocation either to draw _near_ to the thing
that pleaseth, or to _retire_ from the thing that displeaseth; and
this solicitation is the _endeavour_ or internal beginning of
_animal_ motion, which when the object _delighteth_, is called
_appetite_; when it _displeaseth_, it is called _aversion_, in
respect of the displeasure _present_; but in respect of the
displeasure _expected_, _fear_. So that _pleasure_, _love_, and
_appetite_, which is also called desire, are _divers names_ for
divers considerations of the _same thing_.

[Sidenote: Good, evil, pulchritude, turpitude.]

3. Every man, for his own part, calleth that which _pleaseth_, and
is delightful to himself, _good_; and that _evil_ which
_displeaseth_ him: insomuch that while every man _differeth_ from
another in _constitution_, they differ also from one another
concerning the common distinction of good and evil. Nor is there any
such thing as absolute goodness, considered without relation: for
even the goodness which we apprehend in God Almighty, is _his
goodness to us_. And as we call _good_ and _evil_ the _things_ that
please and displease; so call we _goodness_ and _badness_, the
_qualities_ or powers whereby they do it: and the signs of that
goodness are called by the Latins in one word _pulchritudo_, and the
signs of evil, _turpitudo_; to which we have no words precisely
answerable.

As all conceptions we have immediately by the _sense_, are,
_delight_, or _pain_, or _appetite_, or _fear_; so are all the
_imaginations_ after sense. But as they are weaker imaginations, so
are they also weaker pleasures, or weaker pain.

[Sidenote: End, fruition.]

4. As _appetite_ is the beginning of _animal_ motion towards
something that pleaseth us; so is the _attaining_ thereof, the _end_
of that motion, which we also call the _scope_, and aim, and final
cause of the same: and when we attain that end, the delight we have
thereby is called the _fruition_: so that _bonum_ and _finis_ are
different names, but for different considerations of the same thing.

[Sidenote: Profitable, use, vain.]

5. And of _ends_, some of them are called _propinqui_, that is, near
at hand; others _remoti_, far off: but when the ends that be nearer
attaining, be compared with those that be further off, they are
called not ends, but _means_, and the _way_ to those. But for an
_utmost_ end, in which the ancient _philosophers_ have placed
_felicity_, and disputed much concerning the way thereto, there is
no such thing in this world, nor way to it, more than to Utopia: for
while we live, we have desires, and desire presupposeth a further
end. Those things which please us, as the way or _means_ to a
further end, we call _profitable_; and the _fruition_ of them,
_use_; and those things that profit not, _vain_.

[Sidenote: Felicity.]

6. Seeing all _delight_ is _appetite_, and presupposeth a _further_
end, there can be _no contentment_ but in _proceeding_: and
therefore we are not to marvel, when we see, that as men attain to
more riches, honour, or other power; so their appetite continually
groweth more and more; and when they are come to the utmost degree
of some kind of power, they pursue some other, as long as in any
kind they think themselves behind any other: of those therefore that
have attained to the highest degree of honour and riches, some have
affected mastery in some art; as Nero in music and poetry, Commodus
in the art of a gladiator; and such as affect not some such thing,
must find diversion and recreation of their thoughts in the
contention either of play or business: and men justly complain of a
great grief, that they know not what to do. _Felicity_, therefore,
by which we mean continual delight, consisteth _not_ in _having_
prospered, but in _prospering_.

[Sidenote: Good and evil mixed.]

7. There are few things in this world, but _either_ have _mixture_
of good and evil, _or_ there is a chain of them so necessarily
linked together, that the one cannot be taken without the other: as
for example, the pleasures of sin, and the bitterness of punishment,
are inseparable; as is also labour and honour, for the most part.
Now when in the _whole chain_, the _greater part_ is good, the
_whole_ is called _good_; and when the _evil_ over-weigheth, the
_whole_ is called _evil_.

[Sidenote: Sensual delight, and pain; joy and grief.]

8. There are two sorts of pleasure, whereof the _one_ seemeth to
affect the _corporeal_ organ of the sense, and that I call
_sensual_; the _greatest_ part whereof, is that by which we are
invited to give continuance to our _species_; and the _next_, by
which a man is invited to meat, for the preservation of his
_individual_ person: the _other sort_ of delight is not particular
to any part of the body, and is called the delight of the _mind_,
and is that which we call _joy_. Likewise of _pains_, some affect
the _body_, and are therefore called the _pains_ of the body; and
some _not_, and those are called _grief_.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER VIII.

1, 2. Wherein consist the pleasures of sense. 3, 4. Of the
    imagination, or conception of power in man. 5. Honour,
    honourable, worth. 6. Signs of honour. 7. Reverence. 8.
    Passions.


[Sidenote: Wherein consist the pleasures of sense.]

1. Having in the first section of the precedent chapter presupposed,
that motion and _agitation of the brain_ which we call conception,
to be continued _to the heart_, and there to be called _passion_; I
have therefore obliged myself, as far forth as I am able, to search
out and declare _from what_ conception _proceedeth_ every one of
those _passions_ which we commonly take notice of: for, seeing the
things that please and displease, are innumerable, and work
innumerable ways, men have not taken notice but of a very few, which
also are many of them without name.

2. And first, we are to consider, that of conceptions there are
_three sorts_, whereof one is of that which is _present_, which is
_sense_; another, of that which is _past_, which is _remembrance_;
and the third, of that which is _future_, which we call
_expectation_: all which have been manifestly declared in the second
and third chapters; and every of these conceptions is _pleasure_ or
_pain_ _present_. And first for the pleasures of the _body_ which
affect the sense of _touch_ and _taste_, as far forth as they be
_organical_, their conceptions are _sense_: so also is the pleasure
of all _exonerations_ of nature: all which passions I have before
named, _sensual pleasures_; and their contrary, _sensual pains_: to
which also may be added the pleasures and displeasures of _odours_,
if any of them shall be found organical, which for the most part
they are not, as appeareth by this experience which every man hath,
that the same smells, when they seem to proceed from others,
displease, though they proceed from ourselves; but when we think
they proceed from ourselves, they displease not, though they come
from others: the displeasure of this is a conception of hurt thereby
from those odours, as being unwholesome, and is therefore a
conception of evil to come, and not present. Concerning the delight
of _hearing_, it is diverse, and the organ itself not affected
thereby: _simple sounds_ please by _equality_, as the sound of a
bell or lute: insomuch as it seems, an equality continued by the
percussion of the object upon the ear, is pleasure; the contrary is
called _harshness_, such as is grating, and some other sounds, which
do not always affect the body, but only sometime, and that with a
kind of horror beginning at the teeth. _Harmony_, or many sounds
together agreeing, please by the same reason as the _unison_, which
is the sound of equal strings equally stretched. Sounds that differ
in any _height_, please by _inequality and equality alternate_, that
is to say, the higher note striketh twice, for one stroke of the
other, whereby they strike together every second time; as is well
proved by Galileo, in the first dialogue concerning local motion:
where he also sheweth, that two sounds differing a _fifth_, delight
the ear by an _equality_ of striking _after two inequalities_; for
the higher note striketh the ear thrice, while the other strikes but
twice. In like manner he sheweth wherein consisteth the pleasure of
concord, and the displeasure of discord, in other difference of
notes. There is yet _another_ pleasure and displeasure of sounds,
which consisteth in _consequence of one note after another,
diversified_ both by _accent_ and _measure_; whereof that which
pleaseth is called an _air_; but for what reason one succession in
tone and measure is a more pleasing air than another, I confess I
know not; but I conjecture the reason to be, for that some of them
imitate and revive some passion which otherwise we take no notice
of, and the other not; for _no air pleaseth but for a time_, no more
doth imitation. Also the pleasures of the _eye_ consist in a certain
_equality_ of _colour_: for _light_, the most glorious of all
colours, is made by _equal_ operation of the object; whereas
_colour_ is _perturbed_, that is to say, unequal light, as hath been
said, chapter II. section 8. And therefore colours, the more
equality is in them, the more resplendent they are; and as _harmony_
is pleasure to the _ear_, which consisteth of _divers sounds_; so
perhaps may some mixture of _divers colours_ be _harmony_ to the
_eye_, more than another mixture. There is yet another delight by
the _ear_, which happeneth only to men of skill in music, which is
of another nature, and not, as these, conception of the present, but
rejoicing of their own skill; of which nature are the passions of
which I am to speak next.

[Sidenote: Of the imagination, or conception of power in man.]

3. Conception of the _future_, is but a _supposition_ of the _same_,
proceeding from _remembrance_ of what is past; and we so far
_conceive_ that anything _will be hereafter_, as we _know_ there is
_something at the present_ that hath power to produce it: and that
anything hath power now to produce another thing hereafter, we
cannot conceive, but by remembrance that it hath produced the like
heretofore. Wherefore all conception of future, is conception of
power able to produce something. Whosoever therefore expecteth
pleasure to come, must conceive withal some power in himself by
which the same may be attained. And because the passions, whereof I
am to speak next, consist in conception of the future, that is to
say, in conception of power past, and the act to come; before I go
any further, I must in the next place speak somewhat concerning this
power.

4. By this power I mean the same with the faculties of the _body_,
_nutritive_, _generative_, _motive_, and of the _mind_, _knowledge_;
and besides these, such _further_ power as by them is acquired,
_viz._ _riches_, _place_ of authority, _friendship_ or _favour_, and
_good fortune_; _which_ last is really nothing else but the favour
of God Almighty. The _contraries_ of these are _impotencies_,
_infirmities_, or _defects_ of the said powers respectively. And
because the power of one man resisteth and hindereth the effects of
the power of another, _power_ simply is no more, but the _excess_ of
the power of one above that of another: for equal powers opposed,
destroy one another; and such their opposition is called contention.

[Sidenote: Honour, honourable, worth.]

5. _signs_ by which we know our own _power_, are those _actions_
which proceed from the same; and the signs by which _other men_ know
it, are such _actions_, _gesture_, _countenance_ and _speech_, as
usually such powers produce: and the _acknowledgment_ of power is
called _honour_; and to honour a man inwardly, is to conceive or
acknowledge that that man hath the odds or excess of that power
above him with whom he contendeth or compareth himself. And
honourable are those signs for which one man acknowledgeth power or
excess above his concurrent in another: as for example, _beauty_ of
person, consisting in a lively aspect of the countenance, and other
_signs_ of _natural heat_, are honourable, being signs precedent of
power _generative_, and much issue; as also, general reputation
among those of the other sex, because signs consequent of the same.
And actions proceeding from _strength of body_, and open force, are
honourable, as signs consequent of power _motive_, such as are
victory in battle or duel; _a d’avoir tué son homme_. Also to
adventure upon great exploits and danger, as being a sign consequent
of opinion of our own strength, and that opinion a sign of the
strength itself. And to teach or persuade are honourable, because
they be signs of _knowledge_. And riches are honourable; as signs of
the power that acquired them: and gifts, cost, and magnificence of
houses, apparel, and the like, are honourable, as signs of riches.
And _nobility_ is honourable by reflection, as a sign of power in
the ancestors: and _authority_, because a sign of the strength,
wisdom, favour or riches by which it is attained. And _good fortune_
or casual prosperity is honourable, because a sign of the favour of
God, to whom is to be ascribed all that cometh to us by fortune, no
less than that we attain unto by industry. And the contraries and
defects of these signs are dishonourable; and according to the signs
of honour and dishonour, so we estimate and make the value or worth
of a man: for so much worth is every thing, as a man will give for
the use of all it can do.

[Sidenote: Signs of honour.]

6. The _signs_ of _honour_ are those by which we perceive that one
man acknowledgeth the power and worth of another; such as these, to
_praise_, to _magnify_, to _bless_, to call happy, to pray or
supplicate to, to thank, to offer unto or present, to obey, to
hearken unto with attention, to speak to with consideration, to
approach unto in decent manner, to keep distance from, to give way
to, and the like, which are the honour the inferior giveth to the
superior.

But the _signs of honour_ from the superior to the inferior, are
such as these; to _praise_ or prefer him before his concurrent, to
hear more willingly, to speak to him more familiarly, to admit him
nearer, to employ him rather, to ask his advice rather, to take his
opinions, and to give him _any gifts rather than money_; or if
money, so much as may _not_ imply his _need_ of a _little_: for need
of a little is greater poverty than need of much. And this is enough
for examples of the signs of honour and power.

[Sidenote: Reverence.]

7. _Reverence_ is the conception we have concerning another, that he
hath the _power_ to do unto us both _good_ and _hurt_, but _not_ the
_will_ to do us _hurt_.

[Sidenote: Passions.]

8. In the pleasure men have, or displeasure from the signs of honour
or dishonour done unto them, consisteth the nature of the passions,
whereof we are to speak in the next chapter.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER IX.

1. Glory aspiring, false glory, vain glory. 2. Humility and
    dejection. 3. Shame. 4. Courage. 5. Anger. 6. Revengefulness. 7.
    Repentance. 8. Hope, despair, diffidence. 9. Trust. 10. Pity and
    hardness of heart. 11. Indignation. 12. Emulation and envy. 13.
    Laughter. 14. Weeping. 15. Lust. 16. Love. 17. Charity. 18.
    Admiration and curiosity. 19. Of the passion of them that flock
    to see danger. 20. Of magnanimity and pusillanimity. 21. A view
    of the passions represented in a race.


[Sidenote: Glory aspiring, false glory, vain glory.]

1. Glory, or internal gloriation or triumph of the mind, is the
passion which proceedeth from the imagination or conception of our
_own power_ above the power of him that contendeth with us; the
_signs_ whereof, besides those in the countenance, and other
gestures of the body which cannot be described, are, _ostentation_
in words, and _insolency_ in actions: and this passion, of them whom
it displeaseth, is called _pride_; by them whom it pleaseth, it is
termed a _just valuation_ of himself. This imagination of our power
or worth, may be from an assured and certain _experience_ of our own
actions; and then is that glory _just_, and well grounded, and
begetteth an opinion of _increasing_ the same by other actions to
follow; in which consisteth the appetite which we call _aspiring_,
or proceeding from one degree of power to another. The same passion
may proceed _not_ from any _conscience_ of our own actions, but from
fame and trust of _others_, whereby one may think well of himself,
and yet be deceived; and this is _false glory_, and the aspiring
consequent thereto procureth ill success. Further, the _fiction_,
which is also imagination, of actions done by ourselves, which never
were done, is _glorying_; but because it begetteth no appetite nor
endeavour to any further attempt, it is merely _vain_ and
unprofitable; as when a man imagineth himself to do the actions
whereof he readeth in some _romance_, or to be like unto some other
man whose acts he admireth: and this is called _vain glory_; and is
exemplified in the fable, by the fly sitting on the axletree, and
saying to himself, What a dust do I make rise! The expression of
_vain glory_ is that wish, which some of the Schools mistaking for
some appetite distinct from all the rest, have called _velleity_,
making a new word, as they made a new passion which was not before.
_Signs_ of _vain glory_ in the _gesture_ are, _imitation_ of others,
counterfeiting and usurping the signs of virtue they have not,
affectation of fashions, captation of honour from their dreams, and
other little stories of themselves, from their country, from their
names, and from the like.

[Sidenote: Humility and dejection.]

2. The passion _contrary to glory_, proceeding from apprehension of
our own infirmity, is called _humility_ by those by whom it is
approved; by the rest, _dejection_ and poorness: which conception
may be well or ill grounded; if well, it produceth fear to attempt
any thing rashly; if ill, it utterly cows a man, that he neither
dares speak publicly, nor expect good success in any action.

[Sidenote: Shame.]

3. It happeneth sometimes, that he that hath a _good_ opinion of
himself, and upon good ground, may nevertheless, by reason of the
_frowardness_ which that passion begetteth, discover in himself some
_defect_ or infirmity, the remembrance whereof dejecteth him; and
this passion is called _shame_; by which being cooled and checked in
his frowardness, he is more wary for the time to come. This passion,
as it is a sign of _infirmity_, which is _dishonour_; so also it is
a sign of _knowledge_, which is _honour_. The sign of it is
_blushing_, which appeareth less in men conscious of their own
defect, because they less betray the infirmities they acknowledge.

[Sidenote: Courage.]

4. _Courage_, in a _large_ signification, is the _absence_ of _fear_
in the presence of any evil whatsoever: but in a _strict_ and more
common meaning, it is _contempt_ of _wounds_ and _death_, when they
oppose a man in the way to his end.

[Sidenote: Anger.]

5. _Anger_ or sudden courage is nothing but the _appetite_ or desire
of _overcoming present_ opposition. It hath been defined commonly to
be grief proceeding from an opinion of contempt; which is confuted
by the often experience which we have of being moved to anger by
things inanimate, and without sense, and consequently incapable of
contemning us.

[Sidenote: Revengefulness.]

6. _Revengefulness_ is that passion which ariseth from an
expectation or _imagination_ of _making_ him that hath _hurt_ us,
_find_ his _own action hurtful_ to himself, and to _acknowledge_ the
same; and this is the height of revenge: for though it be not hard,
by returning evil for evil, to make one’s adversary displeased with
his own fact; yet to make him acknowledge the same, is so difficult,
that many a man had rather die than do it. Revenge aimeth not at the
death, but at the captivity or subjection of an enemy; which was
well expressed in the exclamation of Tiberius Cæsar, concerning one,
that, to frustrate his revenge, had killed himself in prison; _Hath
he escaped me?_ To _kill_, is the aim of them that _hate_, to _rid_
themselves out of fear: _revenge_ aimeth at _triumph_, which over
the dead is not.

[Sidenote: Repentance.]

7. _Repentance_ is the passion which proceedeth from _opinion_ or
knowledge that the _action_ they have done is _out of the way_ to
the _end_ they would attain: the effect whereof is, to pursue that
way no longer, but, by the consideration of the end, to direct
themselves into a better. The first motion therefore in this passion
is _grief_; but the expectation or conception of returning again
into the way, is _joy_; and consequently, the passion of
_repentance_ is compounded and allayed of both: but the
_predominant_ is _joy_; else were the whole grief, which cannot be,
forasmuch as he that proceedeth towards the end, he conceiveth good,
proceedeth with appetite; and appetite is joy, as hath been said,
chapter VII. section 2.

[Sidenote: Hope, despair, diffidence.]

8. _Hope_ is _expectation_ of _good_ to come, as fear is the
expectation of evil: but when there be causes, some that make us
expect good, and some that make us expect evil, alternately working
in our mind; if the causes that make us expect good, be greater than
those that make us expect evil, the whole passion is hope; if
contrarily, the whole is fear. Absolute _privation_ of hope is
_despair_, a degree whereof is _diffidence_.

[Sidenote: Trust.]

9. _Trust_ is a passion proceeding from the _belief of_ him from
whom we _expect_ or _hope_ for good, so _free_ from _doubt_ that
upon the same we pursue no other way to attain the same good; as
_distrust_ or diffidence is _doubt_ that maketh him endeavour to
provide himself by other means. And that this is the meaning of the
words trust and distrust, is manifest from this, that a man never
provideth himself by a second way, but when he mistrusteth that the
first will not hold.

[Sidenote: Pity and hardness of heart.]

10. _Pity_ is _imagination_ or _fiction_ of _future_ calamity to
_ourselves_, proceeding from the sense of _another_ man’s calamity.
But when it lighteth on such as we think have not deserved the same,
the compassion is greater, because then there appeareth more
probability that the same may happen to us: for, the evil that
happeneth to an innocent man, may happen to every man. But when we
see a man suffer for great crimes, which we cannot easily think will
fall upon ourselves, the pity is the less. And therefore men are apt
to pity those whom they love: for, whom they love, they think worthy
of good, and therefore not worthy of calamity. Thence it is also,
that men pity the vices of some persons at the first sight only, out
of love to their aspect. The contrary of pity is _hardness of
heart_, proceeding either from _slowness_ of imagination, or some
extreme great _opinion_ of their own _exemption_ from the like
calamity, or from hatred of all or most men.

[Sidenote: Indignation.]

11. _Indignation_ is that _grief_ which consisteth in the conception
of _good success_ happening to them whom they think _unworthy_
thereof. Seeing therefore men think all those unworthy whom they
hate, they think them not only unworthy of the good fortune they
have, but also of their own virtues. And of all the passions of the
mind, these two, indignation and pity, are most raised and increased
by eloquence: for, the _aggravation_ of _the calamity_, and
_extenuation_ of the _fault_, augmenteth _pity_; and the
_extenuation_ of the _worth_ of the person, together with the
magnifying of his success, which are the parts of an orator, are
able to turn these two passions into _fury_.

[Sidenote: Emulation and envy.]

12. _Emulation_ is _grief_ arising from seeing _one’s self exceeded_
or excelled by his _concurrent_, together with _hope_ to _equal_ or
exceed him in time to come, by his own ability. But, _envy_ is the
same _grief_ joined with _pleasure_ conceived in the imagination of
some _ill_ fortune that may befall him.

[Sidenote: Laughter.]

13. There is a passion that hath _no name_; but the sign of it is
that distortion of the countenance which we call _laughter_, which
is always _joy_: but what joy, what we think, and wherein we triumph
when we laugh, is not hitherto declared by any. That it consisteth
in _wit_, or, as they call it, in the _jest_, experience
_confuteth_: for men laugh at mischances and indecencies, wherein
there lieth no wit nor jest at all. And forasmuch as the same thing
is no more ridiculous when it groweth stale or usual, whatsoever it
be that moveth laughter, it must be _new_ and _unexpected_. Men
laugh often, especially such as are greedy of applause from every
thing they do well, at their own actions performed never so little
beyond their own expectations; as also at their own _jests_: and in
this case it is manifest, that the passion of laughter proceedeth
from a _sudden conception_ of some _ability_ in himself that
laugheth. Also men laugh at the _infirmities_ of others, by
comparison wherewith their own abilities are set off and
illustrated. Also men laugh at _jests_, the _wit_ whereof always
consisteth in the elegant _discovering_ and conveying to our minds
some _absurdity_ of _another_: and in this case also the passion of
laughter proceedeth from the _sudden_ imagination of our own odds
and eminency: for what is else the recommending of ourselves to our
own good opinion, by comparison with another man’s infirmity or
absurdity? For when a jest is broken upon ourselves, or friends of
whose dishonour we participate, we never laugh thereat. I may
therefore conclude, that the passion of laughter is nothing else but
_sudden glory_ arising from some sudden _conception_ of some
_eminency_ in ourselves, by _comparison_ with the _infirmity_ of
others, or with our own formerly: for men laugh at the follies of
themselves past, when they come suddenly to remembrance, except they
bring with them any present dishonour. It is no wonder therefore
that men take heinously to be laughed at or derided, that is,
triumphed over. Laughter _without offence_, must be at _absurdities_
and infirmities _abstracted_ from persons, and when all the company
may laugh together: for laughing to one’s-self putteth all the rest
into jealousy and examination of themselves. Besides, it is vain
glory, and an argument of little worth, to think the infirmity of
another, sufficient matter for his triumph.

[Sidenote: Weeping.]

14. The passion opposite hereunto, whose signs are another
distortion of the face with tears, called _weeping_, is the _sudden
falling out with_ ourselves, or sudden conception of defect; and
therefore _children_ weep often; for seeing they think that every
thing ought to be given them which they desire, of necessity every
repulse must be a check of their expectation, and puts them in mind
of their too much weakness to make themselves masters of all they
look for. For the same cause _women_ are more apt to weep than men,
as being not only more accustomed to have their wills, but also to
measure their powers by the power and love of others that protect
them. Men are apt to weep that prosecute revenge, when the revenge
is suddenly stopped or frustrated by the repentance of their
adversary; and such are the tears of _reconciliation_. Also
revengeful men are subject to this passion upon the beholding those
men they pity, and suddenly remember they cannot help. Other weeping
in men proceedeth for the most part from the same cause it
proceedeth from in women and children.

[Sidenote: Lust.]

15. The appetite which men call _lust_, and the fruition that
appertaineth thereunto, is a _sensual_ pleasure, but _not only_
that; there is in it also a delight of the mind: for it consisteth
of two appetites together, to _please_, and to _be pleased_; and the
delight men take in delighting, is not sensual, but a pleasure or
joy of the mind consisting in the imagination of the power they have
so much to please. But the name _lust_ is used where it is
condemned; otherwise it is called by the general word _love_: for
the passion is one and the same indefinite desire of different sex,
as natural as hunger.

[Sidenote: Love.]

16. Of _love_, by which is understood the joy man taketh in the
fruition of any _present_ good, hath been already spoken of in the
first section, chapter VII. under which is contained the _love_ men
bear to one _another_, or pleasure they take in one another’s
company; and by which nature, men are said to be sociable. But there
is another kind of love, which the Greeks call Ἔρως, and is that
which we mean, when we say that a man is in love: forasmuch as this
passion cannot be without diversity of sex, it cannot be denied but
that it _participateth_ of that indefinite _love_ mentioned in the
former section. But there is a great difference betwixt the desire
of a man _indefinite_, and the same desire _limited ad hunc_; and
this is that _love_ which is the great theme of poets: but
notwithstanding their praises, it must be defined by the word
_need_: for it is a conception a man hath of his need of _that one
person_ desired. The cause of this passion is _not_ always _nor_ for
the most part _beauty_, or other quality in the beloved, unless
there be withal _hope_ in the person that loveth: which may be
gathered from this, that in great difference of persons, the
_greater_ have often fallen in love with the _meaner_; but not
contrary. And from hence it is, that for the most part they have
much better fortune in love, whose hopes are built upon something
_in_ _their person_, than those that trust to their _expressions_
and _service_; and they that _care less_, than they that _care
more_: which not perceiving, many men cast away their services, as
one arrow after another, till, in the end, together with their
hopes, they lose their wits.

[Sidenote: Charity.]

17. There is yet another passion sometimes called _love_, but more
properly _good will_ or _charity_. There can be no greater argument
to a man, of his own power, than to find himself able not only to
accomplish his own desires, but also to _assist_ other men in
theirs: and this is that conception wherein consisteth _charity_. In
which, first, is contained that _natural affection_ of parents to
their children, which the Greeks call Στοργὴ, as _also_, that
affection wherewith men seek to _assist_ those that adhere unto
them. But the affection wherewith men many times bestow their
benefits on _strangers_, is not to be called charity, but either
_contract_, whereby they seek to purchase friendship; or _fear_,
which maketh them to purchase peace. The opinion of Plato concerning
honourable love, delivered according to his custom in the person of
Socrates, in the dialogue intituled _Convivium_, is this, that a man
full and pregnant with wisdom and other virtues, naturally seeketh
out some beautiful person, of age and capacity to conceive, in whom
he may, without sensual respects, engender and produce the like. And
this is the _idea_ of the then noted _love_ of Socrates wise and
continent, to Alcibiades young and beautiful: in which, love is not
the sought honour, but the issue of his knowledge; contrary to the
common love, to which though issue sometimes follows, yet men seek
not that, but to please, and to be pleased. It should be therefore
this charity, or desire to assist and advance others. But why then
should the wise seek the ignorant, or be more charitable to the
beautiful than to others? There is something in it savouring of the
use of that time: in which matter though Socrates be acknowledged
for continent, yet the _continent_ have the passion they _contain_,
as _much_ and more than they that _satiate_ the appetite; which
maketh me suspect this _platonic_ love for merely sensual; but with
an honourable pretence for the old to haunt the company of the young
and beautiful.

[Sidenote: Admiration and curiosity.]

18. Forasmuch as all _knowledge_ beginneth from _experience_,
therefore also _new experience_ is the beginning of _new knowledge_,
and the increase of experience the beginning of the increase of
knowledge. Whatsoever therefore happeneth new to a man, giveth him
matter of _hope_ of _knowing_ somewhat that he knew _not before_.
And this hope and expectation of future knowledge from anything that
happeneth new and strange, is that passion which we commonly call
_admiration_; and the same considered as appetite, is called
_curiosity_, which is appetite of knowledge. As in the discerning of
faculties, _man leaveth_ all community with _beasts_ at the faculty
of _imposing names_; so also doth he surmount their nature at this
_passion_ of _curiosity_. For when a beast seeth anything new and
strange to him, he considereth it so far only as to discern whether
it be likely to serve his turn, or hurt him, and accordingly
approacheth nearer to it, or fleeth from it: whereas man, who in
most events remembereth in what manner they were caused and begun,
looketh for the cause and beginning of everything that ariseth new
unto him. And from this passion of admiration and curiosity, have
arisen not only the invention of names, but also supposition of such
causes of all things as they thought might produce them. And from
this beginning is derived all _philosophy_; as _astronomy_ from the
admiration of the course of heaven; _natural philosophy_ from the
strange effects of the elements and other bodies. And from the
degrees of curiosity, proceed also the degrees of knowledge amongst
men: for, to a man in the chase of riches or authority, (which in
respect of knowledge are but sensuality) it is a diversity of little
pleasure, whether it be the motion of the sun or the earth that
maketh the day, or to enter into other contemplations of any strange
accident, otherwise than whether it conduce or not to the end he
pursueth. Because _curiosity_ is _delight_, therefore also _novelty_
is so, but especially that novelty from which a man conceiveth an
_opinion_ true or false of _bettering_ his own estate; for, in such
case, they stand affected with the hope that all gamesters have
while the cards are shuffling.

[Sidenote: Of the passion of them that flock to see danger.]

19. Divers other passions there be, but they want names: whereof
some nevertheless have been by most men observed: for example; from
what passion proceedeth it, that men take _pleasure_ to _behold_
from the shore the _danger_ of them that are at sea in a tempest, or
in fight, or from a safe castle to behold two armies charge one
another in the field? It is certainly, in the whole sum, _joy_; else
men would never flock to such a spectacle. Nevertheless there is in
it both _joy_ and _grief_: for as there is novelty and remembrance
of our own security present, which is _delight_; so there is also
_pity_, which is grief; but the delight is so far predominant, that
men usually are content in such a case to be spectators of the
misery of their friends.

[Sidenote: Of magnanimity and pusillanimity.]

20. _Magnanimity_ is no more than _glory_, of the which I have
spoken in the first section; but _glory well grounded_ upon certain
experience of a power sufficient to attain his end in open manner.
And _pusillanimity_ is the _doubt_ of that. Whatsoever therefore is
a sign of _vain glory_, the same is also a sign of _pusillanimity_:
for sufficient power maketh glory a spur to one’s end. To be
_pleased_ or _displeased_ with _fame true_ or _false_, is a _sign_
of that same, because he that relieth on fame hath not his success
in his own power. Likewise _art_ and _fallacy_ are signs of
pusillanimity, because they depend not upon our own power, but the
ignorance of others. Also _proneness_ to _anger_, because it argueth
difficulty of proceeding. Also _ostentation_ of _ancestors_, because
all men are more inclined to make shew of their own power when they
have it, than of another’s. To be at _enmity_ and contention with
_inferiors_, is a sign of the same, because it proceedeth from want
of power to end the war. To _laugh_ at others, because it is an
affectation of glory from other men’s infirmities, and not from any
ability of their own. Also _irresolution_, which proceedeth from
want of power enough to contemn the little difficulties that make
deliberations hard.

[Sidenote: A view of the passions represented in a race.]

21. The comparison of the life of man to a race, though it hold not
in every part, yet it holdeth so well for this our purpose, that we
may thereby both see and remember almost all the passions before
mentioned. But this _race_ we must suppose to have no other _goal_,
nor other _garland_, but being foremost, and in it:

  To endeavour, is _appetite_.
  To be remiss, is _sensuality_.
  To consider them behind, is _glory_.
  To consider them before, is _humility_.
  To lose ground with looking back, _vain glory_.
  To be holden, _hatred_.
  To turn back, _repentance_.
  To be in breath, _hope_.
  To be weary, _despair_.
  To endeavour to overtake the next, _emulation_.
  To supplant or overthrow, _envy_.
  To resolve to break through a stop foreseen, _courage_.
  To break through a sudden stop, _anger_.
  To break through with ease, _magnanimity_.
  To lose ground by little hindrances, _pusillanimity_.
  To fall on the sudden, is disposition to _weep_.
  To see another fall, is disposition to _laugh_.
  To see one out-gone whom we would not, is _pity_.
  To see one out-go whom we would not, is _indignation_.
  To hold fast by another, is to _love_.
  To carry him on that so holdeth, is _charity_.
  To hurt one’s-self for haste, is _shame_.
  Continually to be out-gone, is _misery_.
  Continually to out-go the next before, is _felicity_.
  And to forsake the course, is to _die_.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER X.

1. Having shewed in the precedent chapters, that sense proceedeth
from the action of external objects upon the _brain_, or some
internal _substance_ of the _head_; and that the _passions_ proceed
from the alteration there made, and continued to the _heart_: it is
consequent in the next place, seeing the diversity of degrees in
knowledge in divers men, to be greater than may be ascribed to the
divers _tempers_ of their brain, to declare _what other causes_ may
produce such _odds_, and excess of _capacity_, as we daily observe
in one man above another. As for that difference which ariseth from
_sickness_, and such accidental distempers, I omit the same, as
impertinent to this place, and consider it only in such as have
their _health_, and _organs_ well disposed. If the difference were
in the natural temper of the brain, I can imagine no reason why the
same should not appear first and most of all in the senses, which
being equal both in the wise and less wise, infer an equal temper in
the common organ (namely the brain) of all the senses.

2. But we see by experience, that _joy_ and _grief_ proceed _not_ in
_all_ men from the same _causes_, and that men differ very much in
the constitution of the body; whereby, that which helpeth and
furthereth _vital constitution_ in one, and is therefore delightful,
hindereth it and crosseth it in another, and therefore causeth
grief. The _difference_ therefore of _wits_ hath its original _from_
the _different passions_, and from the _ends_ to which the appetite
leadeth them.

3. And first, those men whose ends are _sensual_ delight, and
generally are addicted to _ease_, _food_, _onerations_ and
_exonerations_ of the body, must needs be the _less_ thereby
delighted with those _imaginations_ that _conduce not_ to those
ends, such as are imaginations of _honour_ and _glory_, which, as I
have said before, have respect to the future: for sensuality
consisteth in the pleasure of the senses, which please only for the
present, and take away the inclination to observe such things as
conduce to honour, and consequently maketh men less curious, and
less ambitious, whereby they less consider the way either to
knowledge or other power; in which two consisteth all the excellency
of power cognitive. And this is it which men call _dulness_, and
proceedeth from the appetite of sensual or bodily delight. And it
may well be conjectured, that such passion hath its beginning from a
_grossness_ and _difficulty_ of the _motion_ of the _spirit_ about
the _heart_.

4. The contrary hereunto, is that _quick ranging_ of mind described,
chapter IV. section 3, which is joined with _curiosity_ of comparing
the things that come into the mind, one with another: in which
comparison, a man delighteth himself either with finding unexpected
_similitude_ of things, otherwise much unlike, in which men place
the excellency of _fancy_, and from whence proceed those grateful
similies, metaphors, and other tropes, by which both _poets_ and
_orators_ have it in their power to make things please or displease,
and shew well or ill to others, as they like themselves; or else in
discerning suddenly _dissimilitude_ in things that otherwise appear
the same. And this virtue of the mind is that by which men attain to
exact and perfect _knowledge_; and the pleasure thereof consisteth
in continual instruction, and in distinction of places, persons, and
seasons, and is commonly termed by the name of _judgment_: for, to
judge is nothing else, but to distinguish or discern: and both
_fancy_ and _judgment_ are commonly comprehended under the name of
_wit_, which seemeth to be a tenuity and agility of spirits,
contrary to that restiness of the spirits supposed in those that are
dull.

5. There is another defect of the mind, which men call _levity_,
which betrayeth also _mobility_ in the spirits, but in excess. An
example whereof is in them that in the midst of any serious
discourse, have their minds diverted to every little jest or witty
observation; which maketh them depart from their discourse by a
parenthesis, and from that parenthesis by another, till at length
they either lose themselves, or make their narration like a dream,
or some studied nonsense. The passion from whence this proceedeth,
is _curiosity_, but with _too much equality_ and indifference: for
when all things make equal impression and delight, they equally
throng to be expressed.

6. The virtue opposite to this defect is _gravity_, or steadiness;
in which the end being the great and master-delight, directeth and
keepeth in the way thereto all other thoughts.

7. The _extremity_ of dullness is that _natural folly_ which may be
called _stolidity_: but the extreme of _levity_, though it be
natural folly distinct from the other, and obvious to every man’s
observation, I know _not_ how to call it.

8. There is a fault of the mind called by the Greeks Ἀμαϑια, which
is _indocibility_, or _difficulty_ of being taught; the which must
needs arise from a _false opinion_ that they _know already_ the
truth of that is called in question: for certainly men are not
otherwise so unequal in capacity as the _evidence_ is unequal
between what is taught by the mathematicians, and what is commonly
discoursed of in other books: and therefore if the minds of men were
all of white paper, they would almost equally be disposed to
acknowledge whatsoever should be in right method, and by right
ratiocination delivered to them: but when men have once acquiesced
in untrue opinions, and registered them as authentical records in
their minds, it is no less impossible to speak intelligibly to such
men, than to write legibly upon a paper already scribbled over. The
immediate _cause_ therefore of _indocibility_, is _prejudice_; and
of prejudice, false opinion of our own knowledge.

9. Another, and a principal defect of the mind, is that which men
call _madness_, which appeareth to be nothing else but some
_imagination_ of some such _predominancy_ above the _rest_, that we
have _no passion but from it_; and this conception is nothing else
but excessive _vain glory_, or _vain dejection_; which is most
probable by these examples following, which proceed in appearance
every one of them from _pride_, or some _dejection_ of mind. As
first, we have had the example of one that preached in Cheapside
from a cart there, instead of a pulpit, that he himself was Christ,
which was _spiritual_ pride or madness. We have had also divers
examples of learned madness, in which men have manifestly been
distracted upon any occasion that hath put them in remembrance of
their own ability. Amongst the learned men, may be remembered, I
think also, those that determine of the time of the world’s end, and
other such the points of prophecy. And the gallant madness of Don
Quixote is nothing else but an expression of such height of vain
glory as reading of _romance_ may produce in pusillanimous men. Also
rage and madness of love, are but great indignations of them in
whose brains is predominant contempt from their enemies, or their
mistresses. And the _pride_ taken in _form_ and _behaviour_, hath
made divers men run mad, and to be so accounted, under the name of
fantastic.

10. And as these are the examples of extremities, so also are there
examples too many of the degrees, which may therefore be well
accounted follies; as it is a degree of the _first_, for a man,
without certain evidence, to think himself to be _inspired_, or to
have any other effect of God’s holy spirit than other godly men
have. Of the _second_, for a man continually to speak his mind in a
_cento_ of other men’s Greek or Latin sentences. Of the _third_,
much of the present gallantry in love and duel. Of _rage_, a degree
is _malice_; and of _fantastic_ madness, _affectation_.

11. As the former examples exhibit to us madness, and the degrees
thereof, proceeding from the excess of self-opinion; so also there
be other examples of madness, and the degrees thereof, proceeding
from _too much vain fear_ and _dejection_; as in those melancholy
men that have imagined themselves brittle as glass, or have had some
other like imagination: and degrees hereof are all those exorbitant
and causeless fears, which we commonly observe in melancholy
persons.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XI.


1. Hitherto of the knowledge of things _natural_, and of the
passions that arise naturally from them. Now forasmuch as we give
names not only to things natural, but also to _supernatural_; and by
all names we ought to have some meaning and conception: it followeth
in the next place, to consider what thoughts and imaginations of the
mind we have, when we take into our mouths the most blessed name of
GOD, and the names of those _virtues_ we attribute unto him; as
also, what _image_ cometh into the mind at hearing the name of
_spirit_, or the name of _angel_, good or bad.

2. And forasmuch as God Almighty is _incomprehensible_, it
followeth, that we can have _no_ conception or _image_ of the
_Deity_, and consequently, all _his attributes_ signify our
_inability_ and defect of power to _conceive_ any thing concerning
his nature, and not any conception of the same, excepting only this,
that _there is a God_: for the effects we acknowledge naturally, do
include a power of their producing, before they were produced; and
that power presupposeth something existent that hath such power: and
the thing so existing with power to produce, if it were not eternal,
must needs have been produced by somewhat before it, and that again
by something else before that, till we come to an eternal, that is
to say, the first power of all powers, and first cause of all
causes: and this is it which all men conceive by the name of GOD,
implying eternity, incomprehensibility, and omnipotency. And thus
all that will consider, may know _that_ God is, though not _what_ he
is: even a man that is born blind, though it be not possible for him
to have any imagination what kind of thing fire is; yet he cannot
but know that somewhat there is that men call fire, because it
warmeth him.

3. And whereas we attribute to God Almighty, _seeing_, _hearing_,
_speaking_, _knowing_, _loving_, and the like, by which names we
understand something in _men_ to whom we attribute them, we
understand _nothing_ by them in the nature of God: for, as it is
well reasoned, _Shall not the God that made the_ _eye, see; and the
ear, hear?_ So it is also, if we say, shall God, which made the eye,
not see without the eye; or that made the ear, not hear without the
ear; or that made the brain, not know without the brain; or that
made the heart, not love without the heart? The _attributes_
therefore given unto the _Deity_, are such as _signify_ either _our
incapacity_ or our _reverence_: our incapacity, when we say
incomprehensible and infinite; our reverence, when we give him those
names, which amongst us are the names of those things we most
magnify and commend, as omnipotent, omniscient, just, merciful, &c.
And when God Almighty giveth those names to himself in the
Scriptures, it is but ἀνϑρωποπαθῶς, that is to say, by descending to
our manner of speaking; without which we are not capable of
understanding him.

4. By the name of _spirit_, we understand a _body natural_, but of
such _subtilty_, that it worketh not upon the senses; but that
filleth up the place which the image of a visible body might fill
up. Our conception therefore of spirit consisteth of _figure without
colour_; and in figure is understood dimension, and consequently, to
conceive a spirit, is to conceive something that hath dimension. But
_spirits supernatural_ commonly signify some _substance without_
dimension; which two words do flatly contradict one another: and
therefore when we attribute the name of spirit unto God, we
attribute it not as the name of anything we conceive, no more than
we ascribe unto him sense and understanding; but as a signification
of our reverence, we desire to abstract from him all corporal
grossness.

5. Concerning other things, which some men call _spirits
incorporeal_, and some _corporeal_, it is not _possible_ by
_natural_ means only, to come to _knowledge_ of so much, as that
_there are such_ things. We that are Christians _acknowledge_ that
there be angels good and evil, and that there are spirits, and that
the soul of a man is a spirit, and that those spirits are immortal:
_but_, to _know_ it, that is to say, to have natural evidence of the
same, it is _impossible_: for, all _evidence_ is _conception_, as it
is said, chap. VI. sect. 3, and all conception is imagination, and
proceedeth from _sense_, chap. III. sect. 1. And _spirits_ we
suppose to be those substances which work _not_ upon the _sense_,
and therefore not conceptible. But though the Scripture acknowledges
spirits, yet doth it nowhere say, that they are incorporeal, meaning
thereby, without dimension and quality; nor, I think, is that word
incorporeal at all in the Bible; but it is said of the spirit, that
it abideth in men; sometimes that it dwelleth in them, sometimes
that it cometh on them, that it descendeth, and goeth, and cometh;
and that spirits are angels, that is to say messengers: all which
words do imply _locality_; and locality is _dimension_; and
whatsoever hath dimension, is _body_, be it never so subtile. To me
therefore it seemeth, that the Scripture favoureth them more, that
hold angels and spirits corporeal, than them that hold the contrary.
And it is a plain _contradiction_ in natural discourse, to say of
the soul of man, that it is _tota in toto, et tota in qualibet parte
corporis_, grounded neither upon reason nor revelation, but
proceeding from the ignorance of what those things are which are
called _spectra_, images, that appear in the dark to children, and
such as have strong fears, and other strange imaginations, as hath
been said, chapter III. sect. 5, where I call them phantasms: for,
taking them to be things real, without us, like bodies, and seeing
them to come and vanish so strangely as they do, unlike to _bodies_;
what could they call them else, but _incorporeal bodies_? which is
not a name, but an absurdity of speech.

6. It is true, that the heathens, and all nations of the world, have
acknowledged that there be _spirits_, which for the most part they
hold to be incorporeal; whereby it might be thought, that a man by
natural reason, may arrive, without the Scriptures, to the knowledge
of this, _that spirits are_: but the erroneous collection thereof by
the heathens, may proceed, as I have said before, from the ignorance
of the cause of ghosts and phantasms, and such other apparitions.
And from thence had the Grecians their number of gods, their number
of _dæmons_ good or bad, and for every man his _genius_; which is
not the acknowledging of this truth, _that spirits are_; but a false
opinion concerning the force of imagination.

7. And seeing the _knowledge_ we have of _spirits_, is _not natural_
knowledge, but _faith_ from supernatural revelation given to the
holy writers of the Scriptures; it followeth, that of inspirations
also, which is the operation of spirit in us, the knowledge which we
have, must all proceed from Scripture. The _signs_ there set down of
_inspiration_, are _miracles_, when they be great, and manifestly
above the power of men to do by imposture: as for example, the
inspiration of Elias was known by the miraculous burning of the
sacrifice. But the _signs_ to _distinguish_ whether a _spirit_ be
_good_ or _evil_, are the same by which we distinguish whether a man
or a tree be good or evil, namely, _actions_ and _fruit_: for there
are _lying_ spirits, wherewith men are inspired sometimes, as well
as with _spirits_ of _truth_. And we are commanded in Scripture, to
judge of the spirits by their doctrine, and not of the doctrine by
the spirits. For miracles, our Saviour (_Matth._ xxiv. 24) hath
forbidden us to rule our faith by them. And Saint Paul saith,
(_Gal._ i. 8): _Though an angel from heaven preach to you
otherwise_, &c. _let him be accursed_. Where it is plain, that we
are not to judge whether the doctrine be true or not, by the angel;
but whether the angel say true or no, by the doctrine. So likewise,
(_1 Joh._ iv. 1): _Believe not every spirit: for false prophets are
gone out into the world_. Verse 2: _Hereby shall ye know the spirit
of God_. Verse 3: _Every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: and this is the spirit
of Antichrist_. Verse 15: _Whosoever confesseth that Jesus is the
Son of God, in him dwelleth God, and he in God_. The _knowledge_
therefore we have of _good_ and _evil_ inspiration, cometh _not_ by
_vision_ of an angel that may teach it, _nor_ by a _miracle_ that
may seem to confirm it; _but_ by _conformity_ of doctrine with this
article and fundamental point of Christian faith, which also Saint
Paul (_1 Cor._ iii. 11) saith is the sole foundation, _That Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh_.

8. But if _inspiration_ be discerned by _this_ point, and _this_
point be acknowledged and believed upon the _authority_ of the
_Scriptures_; _how_ (may some men ask) know we that the _Scripture
deserveth_ so great _authority_, which must be no less than that of
the lively voice of God; that is, how do we know the _Scriptures_ to
be the _word of God_? And first, it is manifest, that if by
knowledge we understand science infallible and natural, as is
defined, chap. VI. sect. 4, proceeding from sense, we cannot be said
to know it, because it proceedeth not from the conceptions
engendered by sense. And if we understand knowledge as supernatural,
we cannot have it but by inspiration: and of that _inspiration_ we
cannot judge, but by the _doctrine_: it followeth, that we have not
any way, natural or supernatural, of the _knowledge_ thereof, which
can properly be called _infallible science_ and _evidence_. It
remaineth, that the knowledge that we have that the Scriptures are
the word of God, is only _faith_, which faith therefore is also by
Saint Paul (_Heb._ xi. 1) defined to be _the evidence of things not
seen_; that is to say, not otherwise evident but by faith: for,
whatsoever either is evident by natural reason, or revelation
supernatural, is not called faith; else should not faith cease, no
more than charity, when we are in heaven; which is contrary to the
doctrine of the Scripture. And, we are _not_ said to _believe_,
_but_ to _know_ those things that be _evident_.

9. Seeing then the acknowledgment of Scriptures to be the word of
God, is not evidence, but faith, and faith (chapter VI. sect. 7)
consisteth in the trust we have of other men, it appeareth plain,
that the men so trusted, are the holy men of God’s church succeeding
one another from the time of those that saw the wondrous works of
God Almighty in the flesh. Nor doth this imply that God is not the
worker or efficient cause of faith, or that faith is begotten in man
without the spirit of God: for, all those good opinions which we
admit and believe, though they proceed from hearing, and hearing
from teaching, both which are natural, yet they are the work of God:
for, all the works of nature are his, and they are attributed to the
Spirit of God: as for example, _Exod._ xxviii. 3: _Thou shalt speak
unto all cunning men, whom I have filled with the_ SPIRIT _of
wisdom, that they may make Aaron’s garments for his consecration,
that he may serve me in the priest’s office_. Faith therefore,
wherewith we believe, is the work of the Spirit of God in that
sense, by which the Spirit of God giveth to one man wisdom and
cunning in workmanship more than another; and by which he effecteth
also in other points pertaining to our ordinary life, that one man
believeth that, which, upon the same grounds, another doth not; and
one man reverenceth the opinion, and obeyeth the commands of his
superior, and others not.

10. And seeing our faith, that the Scriptures are the word of God,
began from the confidence and trust we repose in the _church_; there
can be no doubt but that their _interpretation_ of the same
Scriptures (when any doubt or controversy shall arise, by which this
fundamental point, _that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh_, may be
called in question) is _safer_ for any man to trust to, than his
_own_, whether _reasoning_ or _spirit_, that is to say, his own
_opinion_.

11. Now concerning men’s _affections_ to _Godward_, they are not the
same always that are described in the chapter concerning passions.
There, for to love, is to be delighted with the image or conception
of the thing loved; but God is unconceivable: _to love God_
therefore, in the Scripture, is to _obey his commandments_, and to
_love one another_. Also to _trust God_, is different from our
_trusting_ one _another_: for, when a man trusteth a man, (chap. IX.
sect. 9) he layeth aside his own endeavours: but if we do so in our
trust to God Almighty, we disobey him; and how shall we trust to him
whom we know we disobey? To _trust_ to _God Almighty_ therefore, is
to _refer_ to his _good pleasure_ all that is _above our_ own power
to effect: and this is _all one_ with _acknowledging one_ only God,
which is the first commandment. And to trust _in Christ_, is no more
but to acknowledge him for God; which is the fundamental article of
our Christian faith: and consequently, to trust, rely, or, as some
express it, to cast and roll ourselves on Christ, is the same thing
with the fundamental point of faith, namely, that _Jesus Christ is
the son of the living God_.

12. To _honour_ God internally in the heart, is the same thing with
that we ordinarily call honour amongst men: for it is nothing but
the _acknowledging_ of his _power_; and the signs thereof, the same
with the signs of the honour due to our superiors, mentioned chapter
VIII. section 6, viz. to _praise_, to _magnify_, to _bless_, to pray
to him, to thank him, to give oblations and sacrifices to him, to
give attention to his word, to speak to him in prayer with
consideration, to come into his presence with humble gesture, and in
decent manner, and to adorn his worship with magnificence and cost:
and these are natural signs of our honouring him internally: and
therefore the contrary hereof, to neglect prayer, to speak to him
_extempore_, to come to church slovenly, to adorn the place of his
worship worse than our own houses, to take up his name in every idle
discourse, are the manifest signs of contempt of the Divine Majesty.
There be other signs which are arbitrary; as, to be uncovered, as we
be here, to put off their shoes, as Moses at the fiery bush, and
some other of that kind, which in their own nature are indifferent,
till, to avoid indecency and discord, it be otherwise determined by
common consent.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XII.


1. It hath been declared already, how _external_ objects cause
_conceptions_, and conceptions, _appetite_ and _fear_, which are the
_first unperceived beginnings of our actions_: for _either_ the
actions immediately follow the first appetite, as when we do
anything upon a sudden; _or else_ to our first appetite there
succeedeth some conception of evil to happen to us by such actions,
which is fear, and which holdeth us from proceeding. And to that
fear may succeed a new appetite, and to that appetite another fear
alternately, till the action be either done, or some accident come
between, to make it impossible; and so this alternate appetite and
fear ceaseth. This _alternate succession of appetite and fear_
during all the time the action is in our power to do or not to do,
is that we call _deliberation_; which name hath been given it for
that part of the definition wherein it is said that it lasteth so
long as the action, whereof we deliberate, is in our power: for, so
long we have liberty to do or not to do; and deliberation signifieth
a taking away of our own liberty.

2. _Deliberation_ therefore requireth in the action deliberated _two
conditions_; one, that it be _future_; the other, that there be
_hope_ of doing it, or possibility of not doing it; for, _appetite_
and _fear_ are _expectations_ of the future; and there is no
expectation of good, without hope; or of evil, without possibility:
of _necessaries_ therefore there is _no deliberation_. In
deliberation, the last appetite, as also the last fear, is called
_will_, viz. the last appetite, will to do, or will to omit. It is
all one therefore to say _will_ and _last will_: for, though a man
express his present inclination and appetite concerning the
disposing of his goods, by words or writings; yet shall it not be
counted his will, because he hath still liberty to dispose of them
otherways: but when death taketh away that liberty, then it is his
will.

3. _Voluntary_ actions and omissions are such as have beginning in
the _will_; all other are _involuntary_, or _mixed voluntary_;
_involuntary_, such as he doth by necessity of nature, as when he is
pushed, or falleth, and thereby doth good or hurt to another:
_mixed_, such as participate of both; as when a man is carried to
prison, going is voluntary, to the prison, is involuntary: the
example of him that throweth his goods out of a ship into the sea,
to save his person, is of an action altogether voluntary: for, there
is nothing therein involuntary, but the hardness of the choice,
which is not his action, but the action of the winds: what he
himself doth, is no more against his will, than to flee from danger
is against the will of him that seeth no other means to preserve
himself.

4. _Voluntary_ also are the actions that proceed from sudden
_anger_, or _other_ sudden _appetite_ in such men as can discern
good or evil: for, in them the time precedent _is_ to be judged
deliberation: for then also he deliberateth in what cases it is good
to strike, deride, or do any other action proceeding from anger or
other such sudden passion.

5. _Appetite_, _fear_, _hope_, and the rest of the passions are
_not_ called _voluntary_; for they proceed _not from, but are the
will_; and the will is not voluntary: for, a man can no more say he
will will, than he will will will, and so make an infinite
repetition of the word [_will_]; which is absurd, and insignificant.

6. Forasmuch as _will to do_ is _appetite_, and _will to omit_,
_fear_; the _cause_ of _appetite_ and _fear_ is the _cause_ also of
our _will_: but the propounding of the benefits and of harms, that
is to say, of reward and punishment, is the cause of our appetite,
and of our fears, and therefore also of our wills, so far forth as
we believe that such rewards and benefits as are propounded, shall
arrive unto us; and consequently, our _wills_ follow our _opinions_,
as our _actions_ follow our _wills_; in which sense they say truly,
and properly, that say the world is governed by opinion.

7. When the wills of many concur to one and the same action and
effect, this _concourse_ of their _wills_ is called _consent_; by
which we must not understand one will of many men, for every man
hath his several will, but many wills to the producing of one
effect: but when the _wills_ of two divers men _produce_ such
actions as are reciprocally _resistant_ one to the other, this is
called _contention_; and, being upon the persons one of another,
_battle_: whereas actions proceeding from _consent_, are mutual
_aid_.

8. When many wills are involved or included in the will of one or
more consenting, (which how it may be, shall be hereafter declared)
then is that involving of many wills in one or more, called _union_.

9. In _deliberations_ interrupted, as they may be by _diversion_ of
other business, or by _sleep_, the last _appetite_ of such part of
the deliberation is called _intention_, or _purpose_.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XIII.


1. Having spoken of the powers and acts of the mind, both cognitive
and motive, considered in every man by _himself, without relation to
others_; it will fall fitly into _this_ chapter, to speak of the
effects of the same power _one upon another_; which effects are also
the signs, by which one taketh notice what another conceiveth and
intendeth. Of these signs, _some_ are such as _cannot_ easily be
_counterfeited_; as actions and gestures, especially if they be
sudden, whereof I have mentioned some; (for example, look in chapter
IX.) with the several passions whereof they are signs: _others_
there are which _may_ be _counterfeited_; and those are _words_ or
_speech_; of the use and effects whereof, I am to speak in this
place.

2. The first use of language, is the _expression_ of our
_conceptions_, that is, the begetting in one another the same
conceptions that we have in ourselves; and this is called
_teaching_; wherein, if the _conception_ of him that teacheth
continually accompany his words, _beginning_ at something true in
_experience_, then it begetteth the like evidence in the hearer that
understandeth them, and maketh him to _know_ something, which he is
therefore said to _learn_: but if there be _not such evidence_, then
such teaching is called _persuasion_, and begetteth no more in the
hearer, than what is in the speaker’s bare _opinion_. And the
_signs_ of two opinions contradictory one to another; namely,
_affirmation_ and _negation_ of the same thing, is called
_controversy_: but _both affirmations_, or both _negations, consent
in opinion_.

3. The _infallible_ sign of _teaching exactly_, and without error,
is this, that _no man_ hath _ever taught_ the _contrary_: not that
few, how few soever, if any; for commonly truth is on the side of
a few, rather than of the multitude: but when in opinions and
questions considered and discussed by many, it happeneth that not
any one of the men that so discussed them differ from another,
then it may be justly inferred, they know what they teach, and
that otherwise they do not. And this appears most manifestly to
them that have considered the divers subjects wherein they have
exercised their pens, and the divers ways in which they have
proceeded, together with the diversity of the success thereof:
for, those men who have taken in hand to consider nothing else but
the comparison of _magnitudes_, _numbers_, _times_, and _motions_,
and how their proportions are to one another, have thereby been
the authors of all those excellencies by which we differ from such
savage people as now inhabit divers places in America; and as have
been the inhabitants heretofore of those countries where at this
day arts and sciences do most flourish: for, from the studies of
these men, have proceeded whatsoever cometh to us for ornament by
_navigation_, and whatsover we have beneficial to human society by
the _division_, _distinction_, and _portraiting the face of the
earth_; whatsoever also we have by the _account of times_, and
_foresight of the course of heaven_; whatsoever by _measuring
distances_, _planes_, and _solids_ of all sorts; and whatsoever
either _elegant_ or _defensible_ in _building_: all which supposed
away, what do we differ from the wildest of the Indians? Yet to
this day was it never heard of, that there was any _controversy_
concerning any conclusion in this subject; the science whereof
hath nevertheless been continually amplified and enriched by the
conclusions of most difficult and profound speculation. The
_reason_ whereof is apparent to every man that looketh into their
writings; for they proceed from most _low_ and _humble_
principles, evident even to the meanest capacity; going on
_slowly_, and with most _scrupulous ratiocination_; viz. from the
imposition of names, they infer the truth of their _first_
propositions; and from two of the first, a _third_; and from any
two of the three, a _fourth_; and so on, according to the steps of
science, mentioned chapter VI. section 4. On the other side, those
men who have written concerning the faculties, passions, and
manners of men, that is to say, of _moral philosophy_, and of
_policy_, _government_, and _laws_, whereof there be infinite
volumes, have been so _far from removing doubt_ and controversy in
the questions they have handled, _that_ they have very much
_multiplied the same_: _nor_ doth any man at this day so much as
pretend to _know_ more than hath been delivered two thousand years
ago by Aristotle: and yet every man thinks that in this subject he
knoweth as much as any other; supposing there needeth thereunto no
study but that accrueth unto them by natural wit; though they
play, or employ their mind otherwise in the purchase of wealth or
place. The reason whereof is no other, than that in their writings
and discourses they take for principles those opinions which are
already vulgarly received, whether true or false; being for the
most part false. There is therefore a great deal of _difference_
between _teaching_ and _persuading_; the sign of _this_ being
_controversy_; the sign of the _former_, _no controversy_.

4. There be _two sorts_ of men that commonly be called _learned_:
one is that sort that proceedeth _evidently_ from humble principles,
as is described in the last section; and those men are called
_mathematici_: _the other_ are they that _take up_ maxims from their
_education_, and from the _authority_ of men, or of custom, and
_take the habitual discourse of the tongue for ratiocination_; and
these are called _dogmatici_. Now seeing in the last section those
we call _mathematici_ are absolved of the crime of breeding
controversy, and they that pretend not to learning cannot be
accused, the fault lieth altogether in the _dogmatics_, that is to
say, those that are imperfectly learned, and with passion press to
have their opinions pass everywhere for truth, without any evident
demonstration either from experience, or from places of Scripture of
uncontroverted interpretation.

5. The expression of those conceptions which _cause_ in us the
_experience_ of good while we deliberate, as also of those which
cause our expectation of evil, is that which we call _counselling_,
and is the internal deliberation of the mind concerning what we
ourselves are to do or not to do. The _consequences_ of our actions
are our _counsellors_, by _alternate succession_ in the mind. So in
the counsel which a man taketh from _other_ men, the _counsellors
alternately_ do _make appear the consequences_ of the action, and do
not any of them deliberate, but furnish among them all, him that is
counselled with arguments whereupon to deliberate with himself.

6. Another use of speech is _expression_ of _appetite_, _intention_,
and _will_; as the appetite of knowledge by _interrogation_;
appetite to have a thing done by another, as _request_, _prayer_,
_petition_: expressions of our purpose or intention, as _promise_,
which is the affirmation or negation of some action to be done in
the future: _threatening_, which is the promise of evil; and
_commanding_, which is that speech by which we signify to another
our _appetite_ or desire _to have_ any _thing done_, or _left
undone_, for reasons contained in the will itself: for it is not
properly said, _Sic volo, sic jubeo_, without that other clause,
_Stet pro ratione voluntas_: and when the command is a sufficient
reason to move us to action, then is that command called a _law_.

7. Another use of speech is _instigation_ and appeasing, by which we
increase or diminish one another’s passion: it is the same thing
with _persuasion_; the difference not being real; for, the begetting
of _opinion_ and _passion_ is the _same_. But whereas in
_persuasion_ we aim at _getting opinion from passion_; _here_, the
end is, _to raise passion from opinion_. And as in raising an
opinion from passion, any premises are good enough to enforce the
desired conclusion; so, in raising passion from opinion, it is no
matter whether the opinion be true or false, or the narration
historical or fabulous; for, _not_ the _truth_, but the _image_,
maketh passion: and a tragedy, well acted, affecteth no less than a
murder.

8. Though words be the _signs_ we have of one another’s _opinions_
and intentions, because the _equivocation_ of them is so _frequent
according_ to the _diversity of contexture_, and of the company
wherewith they go, which, the presence of him that speaketh, our
_sight_ of his _actions_, and _conjecture_ of his _intentions_, must
help to discharge us of; it must therefore be _extremely hard_ to
find the _opinions_ and meaning of those _men_ that are _gone from
us long ago_, and have left us no other signification thereof than
their books, which cannot possibly be understood without _history_,
to discover those aforementioned circumstances, and also without
great prudence to _observe_ them.

9. When it happeneth that a man signifieth unto two _contradictory_
opinions, whereof the _one_ is _clearly_ and directly _signified_,
and the _other_ either _drawn_ from that by _consequence_, or not
known to be contradictory to it; then, when he is not present to
explicate himself better, we are to take the _former_ for his
opinion; for that is clearly signified to be his, and directly;
whereas the other might proceed from error in the deduction, or
ignorance of the repugnancy. The like also is to be held in two
contradictory expressions of a man’s intention and will, for the
same reason.

10. Forasmuch as whosoever _speaketh_ to another, intendeth thereby
to _make_ him _understand_ what he saith, if he speak unto him
either in a language which he that heareth understandeth not, or use
any word in other sense than he believeth is the sense of him that
heareth, he _intendeth also not_ to make him understand what he
saith; which is a _contradiction_ of himself. It is therefore always
to be supposed, that he which intendeth not to deceive, alloweth the
private interpretation of his speech to him to whom it is addressed.

11. _Silence_, in him that _believeth_ that the same shall be taken
for a _sign of his intent_, _is_ a sign thereof indeed: for, if he
did not consent, the labour of speaking so much as to declare the
same, is so little, as it is to be presumed he would have done it.


                              CONCLUSION.

Thus have we considered the nature of man so far as was requisite
for the finding out the first and most simple elements wherein the
compositions of politic rules and laws are lastly resolved; which
was my present purpose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          DE CORPORE POLITICO:

                               OR THE

                          ELEMENTS OF LAW,

                         MORAL AND POLITIC,

                WITH DISCOURSES UPON SEVERAL HEADS:

                                 AS

           OF THE LAW OF NATURE; OF OATHS AND COVENANTS;
                  OF SEVERAL KINDS OF GOVERNMENT;

                                WITH

                THE CHANGES AND REVOLUTIONS OF THEM.




                           TO THE READER.


                                -------


    READER,

You may be pleased to take notice, that the first part of this work
depends upon a former treatise of Human Nature, written by Mr.
Hobbes, and by a friend of his committed to the press for the
benefit of mankind. It was thought fit, that nothing of so worthy an
author should be left unprinted, especially considering, that this
piece is most useful for the society of reasonable creatures, being
the grounds and principles of policy, without which there would be
nothing but confusion in the world. I am confident, if men’s minds
were but truly fixed upon the centre of this discourse, they would
not prove such weathercocks, to be turned about with the wind of
every false doctrine, and vain opinion. We should then be free from
those disorders which threaten distraction to the soul, and
destruction to the commonwealth. But let others write never so well,
if our practice do not second their instructions, we may be wise
enough to foresee our misery, but never know how to prevent it. What
pity is it, that such rare conclusions as these are, should produce
no other effect, to inform our knowledge, and confute our
conversation, whilst we neglect the truth that is apprehended. Yet
there is some hope, that such observers, whose wisdom hath received
the stamp of goodness, will improve their skill to a real
advancement of those benefits, which lie hoarded up in this curious
cabinet. To whose use and behoof, these excellent notions are
commended, as the best that ever were writ in this kind, and may
serve for a general ground and foundation to all regular
conceptions, that concern the essence and existence of man, the
government of kingdoms and commonwealths, and by consequence our
eternal salvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        DE CORPORE POLITICO.


                                -------




                            PART THE FIRST.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER I.


1, 2. Men by nature equal. 3. By vain glory indisposed to allow
    equality with themselves, to others. 4. Apt to provoke another
    by comparisons. 5. Apt to encroach one upon another. 6. Right
    defined. 7. Right to the end, implieth right to the means. 8.
    Every man his own judge by nature. 9. Every man’s strength and
    knowledge for his own use. 10. Every man by nature hath right to
    all things. 11. War and peace defined. 12. Men by nature in the
    state of war. 13. In manifest inequality might is right. 14.
    Reason dictateth peace.


[Sidenote: Men by nature equal.]

1. In a former treatise of human nature already printed, hath been
set forth the whole nature of man, consisting in the powers natural
of his body and mind, and may all be comprehended in these four,
_strength of body_, _experience_, _reason_, and _passion_.

2. In this, it will be expedient to consider in what estate of
security this our nature hath placed us, and what probability it
hath left us, of continuing and preserving ourselves against the
violence of one another. And first, if we consider how little odds
there is of strength or knowledge, between men of mature age, and
with how great facility he that is the weaker in strength or in wit,
or in both, may utterly destroy the power of the stronger; since
there needeth but little force to the taking away of a man’s life,
we may conclude, that men considered in mere nature, ought to admit
amongst themselves equality; and that he that claimeth no more, may
be esteemed moderate.

[Sidenote: By vain glory indisposed to allow equality with
           themselves, to others.]

3. On the other side, considering the great difference there is in
men, from the diversity of their passions, how some are vainly
glorious, and hope for precedency and superiority above their
fellows, not only when they are equal in power, but also when they
are inferior; we must needs acknowledge that it must necessarily
follow, that those men who are moderate, and look for no more but
equality of nature, shall be obnoxious to the force of others, that
will attempt to subdue them. And from hence shall proceed a general
diffidence in mankind, and mutual fear one of another.

[Sidenote: Apt to provoke another by comparisons.]

4. Further, since men by natural passion are divers ways offensive
one to another, every man thinking well of himself, and hating to
see the same in others, they must needs provoke one another by
words, and other signs of contempt and hatred, which are incident to
all comparison, till at last they must determine the pre-eminence by
strength and force of body.

[Sidenote: Apt to encroach one upon another.]

5. Moreover, considering that many men’s appetites carry them to one
and the same end; which end sometimes can neither be enjoyed in
common, nor divided, it followeth, that the stronger must enjoy it
alone, and that it be decided by battle who is the stronger. And
thus the greatest part of men, upon no assurance of odds, do
nevertheless, through vanity, or comparison, or appetite, provoke
the rest, that otherwise would be contented with equality.

[Sidenote: Right defined.]

6. And forasmuch as necessity of nature maketh men to will and
desire _bonum sibi_, that which is good for themselves, and to avoid
that which is hurtful; but most of all, the terrible enemy of
nature, death, from whom we expect both the loss of all power, and
also the greatest of bodily pains in the losing; it is not against
reason, that a man doth all he can to preserve his own body and
limbs both from death and pain. And that which is not against
reason, men call _right_, or _jus_, or _blameless liberty_ of using
our own natural power and ability. It is therefore a right of
nature, that every man may preserve his own life and limbs, with all
the power he hath.

[Sidenote: Right to the end, implieth right to the means.]

7. And because where a man hath right to the end, and the end cannot
be attained without the means, that is, without such things as are
necessary to the end, it is consequent that it is not against
reason, and therefore right, for a man to use all means, and do
whatsoever action is necessary for the preservation of his body.

[Sidenote: Every man his own judge by nature.]

8. Also, every man by right of nature, is judge himself of the
necessity of the means, and of the greatness of the danger. For if
it be against reason, that I be judge of mine own danger myself,
then it is reason, that another man be judge thereof. But the same
reason that maketh another man judge of those things that concern
me, maketh me also judge of that that concerneth him. And therefore
I have reason to judge of his sentence, whether it be for my
benefit, or not.

[Sidenote: Every man’s strength and knowledge for his own use.]

9. As a man’s judgment in right of nature is to be employed for his
own benefit, so also the strength, knowledge, and art, of every man
is then rightly employed, when he useth it for himself; else must
not a man have right to preserve himself.

[Sidenote: Every man by nature hath right to all things.]

10. Every man by nature hath right to all things, that is to say, to
do whatsoever he listeth to whom he listeth, to possess, use, and
enjoy all things he will and can. For seeing all things he willeth,
must therefore be good unto him in his own judgment, because he
willeth them, and may tend to his preservation some time or other,
or he may judge so, and we have made him judge thereof, section 8,
it followeth, that all things may rightly also be done by him. And
for this cause it is rightly said, _Natura dedit omnia omnibus_,
that Nature hath given all things to all men; insomuch, that _jus_
and _utile_, right and profit, is the same thing. But that right of
all men to all things, is in effect no better than if no man had
right to any thing. For there is little use and benefit of the right
a man hath, when another as strong, or stronger than himself, hath
right to the same.

[Sidenote: War and peace defined.]

11. Seeing then to the offensiveness of man’s nature one to another,
there is added a right of every man to every thing, whereby one man
invadeth with right, and another man with right resisteth, and men
live thereby in perpetual diffidence, and study how to preoccupate
each other; the estate of men in this natural liberty, is the estate
of war. For _war_ is nothing else but that time wherein the will and
contention of contending by force, is either by words or actions
sufficiently declared; and the time which is not war, is _peace_.

[Sidenote: Men by nature in the state of war.]

12. The estate of hostility and war being such, as thereby nature
itself is destroyed, and men kill one another, (as we know also that
it is, both by the experience of savage nations that live at this
day, and by the histories of our ancestors the old inhabitants of
Germany, and other now civil countries, where we find the people
few, and short lived, and without the ornaments and comforts of
life, which by peace and society are usually invented and procured)
he therefore that desireth to live in such an estate as is the
estate of liberty and right of all to all, contradicteth himself.
For every man by natural necessity desireth his own good, to which
this estate is contrary, wherein we suppose contention between men
by nature equal, and able to destroy one another.

[Sidenote: In manifest inequality might is right.]

13. Seeing this right of protecting ourselves by our own discretion
and force, proceedeth from danger, and that danger from the equality
between men’s forces, much more reason is there, that a man prevent
such equality before the danger cometh, and before the necessity of
battle. A man therefore that hath another man in his power to rule
or govern, to do good to, or harm, hath right, by the advantage of
this his present power, to take caution at his pleasure, for his
security against that other in time to come. He therefore that hath
already subdued his adversary, or gotten into his power any other,
that either by infancy, or weakness, is unable to resist him, by
right of nature may take the best caution, that such infant, or such
feeble and subdued person can give him, of being ruled and governed
by him for the time to come. For seeing we intend always our own
safety and preservation, we manifestly contradict that our
intention, if we willingly dismiss such a one, and suffer him at
once to gather strength and be our enemy. Out of which may also be
collected, that irresistible might, in the state of nature, is
right.

[Sidenote: Reason dictateth peace.]

14. But since it is supposed by the equality of strength, and other
natural faculties of men, that no man is of might sufficient, to
assure himself for any long time, of preserving himself thereby,
whilst he remaineth in the state of hostility and war; reason
therefore dictateth to every man for his own good, to seek after
peace, as far forth as there is hope to attain the same; and
strengthen himself with all the help he can procure, for his own
defence against those, from whom such peace cannot be obtained; and
to do all those things which necessarily conduce thereunto.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER II.

1. The law of nature consisteth not in consent of men, but reason.
    2. That every man divest himself of the right he hath to all
    things, is one precept of nature. 3. What it is to relinquish
    and transfer one’s right. 4. The will to transfer, and the will
    to accept, both necessary to the passing away of right. 5. Right
    not transferred by words _de futuro_ only. 6. Words _de futuro_,
    together with other signs of the will, may transfer right. 7.
    Free gift defined. 8. Contract, and the sorts of it. 9. Covenant
    defined. 10. Contract of mutual trust, is of no validity in the
    estate of hostility. 11. No covenant of men but with one
    another. 12. Covenant how dissolved. 13. Covenant extorted by
    fear, in the law of nature valid. 14. Covenant contrary to
    former covenant, void. 15. An oath defined. 16. Oath to be
    administered to every man in his own religion. 17. Oath addeth
    not to the obligation. 18. Covenants bind but to endeavour.


[Sidenote: The law of nature consisteth not in consent of men, but
           reason.]

1. What it is we call the law of nature, is not agreed upon by
those, that have hitherto written. For the most part, such writers
as have occasion to affirm, that anything is against the law of
nature, do allege no more than this, that it is against the consent
of all nations, or the wisest and most civil nations. But it is not
agreed upon, who shall judge which nations are the wisest. Others
make that against the law of nature, which is contrary to the
consent of all mankind; which definition cannot be allowed, because
then no man could offend against the law of nature; for the nature
of every man is contained under the nature of mankind. But forasmuch
as all men are carried away by the violence of their passion, and by
evil customs do those things which are commonly said to be against
the law of nature; it is not the consent of passions, or consent in
some error gotten by custom, that makes the law of nature. Reason is
no less of the nature of man than passion, and is the same in all
men, because all men agree in the will to be directed and governed
in the way to that which they desire to attain, namely, their own
good, which is the work of reason: there can therefore be no other
law of nature than reason, nor no other precepts of _natural law_,
than those which declare unto us the ways of peace, where the same
may be obtained, and of defence where it may not.

[Sidenote: That every man divest himself of the right he hath to all
           things, is one precept of nature.]

2. One precept of the law of nature therefore is this, _that every
man divest himself of the right he hath to all things by nature_.
For when divers men having right not only to all things else, but to
one another’s persons, if they use the same, there ariseth thereby
invasion on the one part, and resistance on the other, which is
_war_, and therefore contrary to the law of nature, the sum whereof
consisteth in making peace.

[Sidenote: What it is to relinquish and transfer one’s right.]

3. When a man divesteth and putteth from himself his right, he
either simply relinquisheth it, or transferreth the same to another
man. To _relinquish_ it, is by sufficient signs to declare, that it
is his will no more to do that action, which of right he might have
done before. To _transfer_ right to another, is by sufficient signs
to declare to that other accepting thereof, that it is his will not
to resist, or hinder him, according to that right he had thereto
before he transferred it. For seeing that by nature every man hath
right to every thing, it is impossible for a man to transfer unto
another any right that he had not before. And therefore all that a
man doth in transferring of right, is no more but a declaring of the
will, to suffer him, to whom he hath so transferred his right, to
make benefit of the same, without molestation. As for example, when
a man giveth his lands or goods to another, he taketh from himself
the right to enter into, and make use of the said lands or goods, or
otherwise to hinder him of the use of what he hath given.

[Sidenote: The will to transfer, and the will to accept, both
           necessary to the passing away of right.]

4. In transferring of right, two things therefore are required: one
on the part of him that transferreth, which is a sufficient
signification of his will therein; the other, on the part of him to
whom it is transferred, which is a sufficient signification of his
acceptation thereof. Either of these failing, the right remaineth
where it was: nor is it to be supposed, that he which giveth his
right to one that accepteth it not, doth thereby simply relinquish
it, and transfer it to whomsoever will receive it: inasmuch as the
cause of transferring the same to one, rather than to another, is in
the one, rather than in the rest.

[Sidenote: Right not transferred by words _de futuro_ only.]

5. When there appear no other signs that a man hath relinquished, or
transferred his right, but only words, it behoveth that the same be
done in words, that signify the present time, or the time past, and
not only the time to come. For he that saith of the time to come, as
for example, to-morrow I will give, declareth evidently, that he
hath not yet given. The right, therefore, remaineth in him to-day,
and so continues, till he have given actually. But he that saith, I
give, presently, or have given to another anything, to have and
enjoy the same to-morrow, or any other time further, hath now
actually transferred the said right, which otherwise he should have
had at the time that the other is to enjoy it.

[Sidenote: Words _de futuro_, together with other signs of the will,
           may transfer right.]

6. But because words alone are not a sufficient declaration of the
mind, as hath been shown chapter XIII. section 8, words spoken _de
futuro_, when the will of him that speaketh them may be gathered by
other signs, may be taken very often as if they were meant _de
præsenti_: for when it appeareth, that he that giveth, would have
his words so understood by him to whom he giveth, as if he did
actually transfer his right, then he must needs be understood to
will all that is necessary to the same.

[Sidenote: Free gift defined.]

7. When a man transferreth any right of his to another, without
consideration of reciprocal benefit, past, present, or to come, this
is called _free gift_. And in free gift, no other words can be
binding, but those which are _de præsenti_, or _de præterito_: for
being _de futuro_ only, they transfer nothing, nor can they be
understood, as if they proceeded from the will of the giver; because
being a free gift, it carrieth with it no obligation greater than
that which is enforced by the words. For he that promiseth to give,
without any other consideration but his own affection, so long as he
hath not given, deliberateth still, according as the causes of his
affections continue, or diminish; and he that deliberateth, hath not
yet willed, because the will is the last act of his deliberation. He
that promiseth therefore, is not thereby a _donor_, but _doson_;
which name was given to that Antiochus, that promised often, but
seldom gave.

[Sidenote: Contract, and the sorts of it.]

8. When a man transferreth his right upon consideration of
reciprocal benefit, this is not free gift, but mutual _donation_,
and is called _contract_. And in all contracts, either both parties
presently perform, and put each other into a certainty and assurance
of enjoying what they contract for, as when men buy or sell, or
barter; or one party performeth presently, and the other promiseth,
as when one selleth upon trust; or else neither party performeth
presently, but trust one another. And it is impossible there should
be any kind of contract besides these three. For either both the
contractors trust, or neither; or else one trusteth, and the other
not.

[Sidenote: Covenant defined.]

9. In all contracts where there is trust, the promise of him that is
trusted, is called a _covenant_. And this, though it be a promise,
and of the time to come, yet it doth transfer the right, when that
time cometh, no less than an actual donation. For it is a manifest
sign, that he which did perform, understood it was the will of him
that was trusted, to perform also. Promises therefore, upon
consideration of reciprocal benefit, are covenants and signs of the
will, or last act of deliberation, whereby the liberty of
performing, or not performing, is taken away, and consequently are
obligatory. For where liberty ceaseth, there beginneth obligation.

[Sidenote: Contract of mutual trust, is of no validity in the estate
           of hostility.]

10. Nevertheless, in contracts that consist of such mutual trust, as
that nothing be by either party performed for the present, when the
contract is between such as are not compellable, he that performeth
first, considering the disposition of men to take advantage of every
thing for their benefit, doth but betray himself thereby to the
covetousness, or other passion of him with whom he contracteth. And
therefore such covenants are of none effect. For there is no reason
why the one should perform first, if the other be likely not to
perform afterward. And whether he be likely or not, he that
doubteth, shall be judge himself, as hath been said chap. I. sect.
8, as long as they remain in the estate and liberty of nature. But
when there shall be such power coercive over both the parties, as
shall deprive them of their private judgments in this point, then
may such covenants be effectual, seeing he that performeth first
shall have no reasonable cause to doubt of the performance of the
other, that may be compelled thereunto.

[Sidenote: No covenant of men but with one another.]

11. And forasmuch as in all covenants, and contracts, and donations,
the acceptance of him to whom the right is transferred, is necessary
to the essence of those covenants, donations, &c., it is impossible
to make a covenant or donation to any, that by nature, or absence,
are unable, or if able, do not actually declare their acceptation of
the same. First of all, therefore, it is impossible for any man to
make a covenant with God Almighty, further than it hath pleased him
to declare who shall receive and accept of the said covenant in his
name. Also it is impossible to make covenant with those living
creatures, of whose wills we have no sufficient sign, for want of
common language.

[Sidenote: Covenant how dissolved.]

12. A covenant to do any action at a certain time and place, is then
dissolved by the covenanter, when that time cometh, either by the
performance, or by the violation. For a covenant is void that is
once impossible. But a covenant not to do, without time limited,
which is as much as to say, a covenant never to do, is dissolved by
the covenanter then only, when he violateth it, or dieth. And
generally, all covenants are dischargeable by the covenantee, to
whose benefit, and by whose right, he that maketh the covenant is
obliged. This right therefore of the covenantee relinquished, is a
release of the covenant. And universally, for the same reason, all
obligations are determinable at the will of the obliger.

[Sidenote: Covenant extorted by fear, in the law of nature valid.]

13. It is a question often moved, whether such covenants oblige, as
are extorted from men by fear. As for example, whether if a man for
fear of death, hath promised to give a thief an hundred pounds the
next day, and not discover him; whether such covenant be obligatory,
or not. And though in some cases such covenant may be void, yet it
is not therefore void, because extorted by fear. For there appeareth
no reason, why that which we do upon fear, should be less firm than
that which we do for covetousness. For both the one and the other
maketh the action voluntary. And if no covenant should be good, that
proceedeth from fear of death, no conditions of peace between
enemies, nor any laws, could be of force, which are all consented to
from that fear. For who would lose the liberty that nature hath
given him, of governing himself by his own will and power, if they
feared not death in the retaining of it? What prisoner in war might
be trusted to seek his ransom, and ought not rather to be killed, if
he were not tied by the grant of his life, to perform his promise?
But after the introduction of policy and laws, the case may alter;
for if by the law the performance of such a covenant be forbidden,
then he that promiseth anything to a thief, not only may, but must
refuse to perform it. But if the law forbid not the performance, but
leave it to the will of the promiser, then is the performance still
lawful: and the covenant of things lawful is obligatory, even
towards a thief.

[Sidenote: Covenant contrary to former covenant, void.]

14. He that giveth, promiseth or covenanteth to one, and after,
giveth, promiseth, or covenanteth the same to another, maketh void
the latter act. For it is impossible for a man to transfer that
right which he himself hath not; and that right he hath not, which
he himself hath before transferred.

[Sidenote: An oath defined.]

15. An _oath_ is a clause annexed to a promise, containing a
renunciation of God’s mercy by him that promiseth, in case he
perform not as far as is lawful and possible for him to do. And this
appeareth by the words which make the essence of the oath, _so help
me God_. So also was it amongst the heathen. And the form of the
Romans was, _Thou Jupiter kill him that breaketh, as I kill this
beast_. The intention therefore of an oath being to provoke
vengeance upon the _breakers_ of covenant; it is to no purpose to
swear by men, be they never so great, because their punishment by
divers accidents may be avoided, whether they will, or no, but God’s
punishment not. Though it were a custom of many nations, to swear by
the life of their princes; yet those princes being ambitious of
divine honour, give sufficient testimony, that they believed,
nothing ought to be sworn by, but the Deity.

[Sidenote: Oath to be administered to every man in his own
           religion.]

16. And seeing men cannot be afraid of the power they believe not,
and an oath is to no purpose, without fear of him they swear by, it
is necessary that he that sweareth, do it in that form which himself
admitteth in his own religion, and not in that form which he useth,
that putteth him to the oath. For though all men may know by nature,
that there is an Almighty power, nevertheless they believe not, that
they swear by him in any other form or name, than what their own,
which they think the true, religion teacheth them.

[Sidenote: Oath addeth not to the obligation.]

17. And by the definition of an oath, it appeareth that it addeth
not a greater obligation to perform the covenant sworn, than the
covenant carrieth in itself, but it putteth a man into a greater
danger, and of greater punishment.

[Sidenote: Covenants bind but to endeavour.]

18. Covenants and oaths are _de voluntariis_, that is, _de
possibilibus_. Nor can the covenantee understand the covenanter to
promise _impossibles_; for they fall not under deliberation: and
consequently, (by chap. XIII. sect. 10 of the _Treatise of Human
Nature_, which maketh the covenantee interpreter) no covenant is
understood to bind further, than to our best endeavour, either in
performance of the thing promised, or in something equivalent.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER III.

1. That men stand to their covenants. 2. Injury defined. 3. That
    injury is done only to the covenantee. 4. The signification of
    those names, just, unjust. 5. Justice not rightly divided into
    commutative, and distributive. 6. It is a law of nature, that he
    that is trusted, turn not that trust to the damage of him that
    trusteth. 7. Ingratitude defined. 8. It is a law of nature, to
    endeavour to accommodate one another: 9. And that man forgive
    upon caution for the future: 10. And that revenge ought to
    respect the future only: 11. That reproach and contempt
    declared, is against the law of nature: 12. That indifference of
    commerce is of the law of nature: 13. That messengers employed
    to procure or maintain peace, ought to be safe by the law of
    nature.


[Sidenote: That men stand to their covenants.]

1. It is a common saying that nature maketh nothing in vain. And it
is most certain, that as the truth of a conclusion, is no more but
the truth of the premises that make it; so the force of the command,
or law of nature, is no more than the force of the reasons inducing
thereunto. Therefore the law of nature mentioned in the former
chapter, section 2, namely, _That every man should divest himself of
the right_, &c. were utterly vain, and of none effect, if this also
were not a law of the same nature, _That every man is obliged to
stand to, and perform, those covenants he maketh_. For what benefit
is it to a man, that any thing be promised, or given unto him, if he
that giveth, or promiseth, performeth not, or retaineth still the
right of taking back what he hath given?

[Sidenote: Injury defined.]

2. The breach or violation of covenant, is that which men call
_injury_, consisting in some action or omission, which is therefore
called _unjust_. For it is action or omission, without _jus_, or
right, which was transferred or relinquished before. There is a
great similitude between that we call _injury_, or _injustice_ in
the actions and conversations of men in the world, and that which is
called _absurd_ in the arguments and disputations of the Schools.
For as he, which is driven to contradict an assertion by him before
maintained, is said to be reduced to an absurdity; so he that
through passion doth, or omitteth that which before by covenant he
promised to do, or not to omit, is said to commit injustice; and
there is in every breach of covenant a contradiction properly so
called. For he that covenanteth, willeth to do, or omit, in the time
to come. And he that doth any action, willeth it in that present,
which is part of the future time contained in the covenant. And
therefore he that violateth a covenant, willeth the doing and the
not doing of the same thing, at the same time, which is a plain
contradiction. And so _injury_ is an _absurdity_ of conversation, as
absurdity is a kind of injustice in disputation.

[Sidenote: That injury is done only to the covenantee.]

3. In all violation of covenant, (to whomsoever accrueth the damage)
the injury is done only to him to whom the covenant was made. For
example, if a man covenant to obey his master, and the master
command him to give money to a third, which he promiseth to do, and
doth not, though this be to the damage of the third, yet the injury
is done to the master only. For he could violate no covenant with
him, with whom none was made, and therefore doth him no injury. For
injury consisteth in violation of covenant by the definition
thereof.

[Sidenote: The signification of those names, just and unjust.]

4. The names of _just_, _unjust_, _justice_, _injustice_, are
equivocal, and signify diversly. For justice and injustice, when
they be attributed to actions, signify the same thing with _no
injury_, and _injury_, and denominate the action _just_, or
_unjust_, but not the man so. For they denominate him _guilty_, or
_not guilty_. But when justice or injustice, are attributed to men,
they signify _proneness_, and affection and inclination of nature,
that is to say, passions of the mind, apt to produce just and unjust
actions. So that when a man is said to be just, or unjust; not the
action, but the passion and aptitude, to do such actions, is
considered. And therefore a just man may have committed an unjust
act; and an unjust man may have done justly, not only one, but most
of his actions. For there is an _oderunt peccare_ in the unjust, as
well as in the just, but from different causes. For the unjust man
who abstaineth from injuries for fear of punishment, declareth
plainly, that the justice of his actions dependeth upon civil
constitution, from whence punishments proceed, which would otherwise
in the estate of nature be unjust, according to the fountain from
whence they spring. This distinction therefore of _justice_, and
_injustice_, ought to be remembered, that when injustice is taken
for guilty, the action is unjust, but not therefore the man; and
when justice is taken for _guiltlessness_, the actions are just, and
yet not always the man. Likewise when justice and injustice are
taken for habits of the mind, the man may be just, or unjust, and
yet not all his actions so.

[Sidenote: Justice not rightly divided into commutative, and
           distributive.]

5. Concerning the justice of actions, the same is usually divided
into two kinds, whereof men call the one _commutative_, and the
other _distributive_; and are said to consist, the one in proportion
_arithmetical_; the other in _geometrical_: and _commutative_
justice, they place in permutation, as buying, selling, and
bartering; _distributive_, in giving to every man according to their
deserts. Which distinction is not well made, inasmuch as injury,
which is the injustice of action, consisteth not in the inequality
of the things changed, or distributed, but in the inequality that
men, contrary to nature and reason, assume unto themselves above
their fellows. Of which inequality, shall be spoken hereafter. And
for _commutative_ justice placed in buying and selling, though the
thing bought be unequal to the price given for it, yet forasmuch as
both the buyer and the seller are made judges of the value, and are
thereby both satisfied, there can be no injury done on either side,
neither party having trusted, or covenanted with the other. And for
_distributive_ justice, which consisteth in the distribution of our
own benefits, seeing a thing is therefore said to be our own,
because we may dispose of it at our own pleasure, it can be no
injury to any man, though our liberality be farther extended towards
another, than towards him; unless we be thereto obliged by covenant:
and then the injustice consisteth in the violation of that covenant,
and not in the inequality of distribution.

[Sidenote: It is a law of nature, that he that is trusted, turn not
           that trust to the damage of him that trusteth]

6. It happeneth many times that man benefitteth, or contributeth, to
the power of another, without any covenant, but only upon confidence
and trust of obtaining the grace and favour of that other, whereby
he may procure a greater, or no less benefit, and assistance to
himself. For by necessity of nature, every man doth in all his
voluntary actions intend some good unto himself. In this case it is
a law of nature, _That no man suffer him, that thus trusteth to his
charity, or good affection towards him, to be in the worse estate
for his trusting_. For if he shall so do, men will not dare to
confer mutually to each other’s defence, nor put themselves into
each other’s mercy upon any terms whatsoever, but rather abide the
utmost and worst event of hostility; by which general diffidence,
men will not only be enforced to war, but also afraid to come so
much within the danger of one another, as to make any overture of
peace. But this is to be understood of those only, that confer their
benefits (as I have said) upon trust only, and not for triumph or
ostentation. For as when they do it upon trust, the end they aimed
at, namely to be well used, is the reward; so also when they do it
for ostentation, they have the reward in themselves.

[Sidenote: Ingratitude defined.]

7. But seeing in this case there passeth no covenant, the breach of
this law of nature is not to be called _injury_. It hath another
name, to wit, _ingratitude_.

[Sidenote: It is a law of nature, to endeavour to accommodate one
           another.]

8. It is also a law of nature, _That every man do help and endeavour
to accommodate each other as far as may be, without danger of their
persons, and loss of their means, to maintain and defend
themselves_. For seeing the causes of war and desolation proceed
from those passions, by which we strive to accommodate ourselves,
and to leave others as far as we can behind us, it followeth, that
that passion by which we strive mutually to accommodate each other,
must be the cause of peace. And this passion is that charity defined
chapter IX. section 17.

[Sidenote: And that man forgive, upon caution for the future.]

9. And in this precept of nature, is included and comprehended also
this, _That a man forgive and pardon him that hath done him wrong,
upon his repentance and caution for the future_. For _pardon_ is
peace granted to him, that, having provoked to war, demandeth it. It
is not therefore charity, but fear, when a man giveth peace to him
that repenteth not, nor giveth caution for maintaining thereof in
the time to come. For he that repenteth not, remaineth with the
affection of an enemy; as also doth he that refuseth to give
caution, and consequently, is presumed not to seek after peace, but
advantage. And therefore to forgive him is not commanded in this law
of nature, nor is charity, but may sometime be prudence. Otherwise,
not to pardon upon repentance and caution, considering men cannot
abstain from provoking one another, is never to give _peace_. And
that is against the general definition of the law of nature.

[Sidenote: And that revenge ought to respect the future only.]

10. And seeing the law of nature commandeth pardon, when there is
repentance and caution for the future, it followeth, that the same
law ordaineth, _That no revenge be taken upon the consideration only
of the offence past, but of the benefit to come_; that is to say,
that all revenge ought to tend to amendment, either of the person
offending, or of others, by the example of his punishment; which is
sufficiently apparent, in that the law of nature commandeth pardon,
where the future time is secured. The same is also apparent by this,
that revenge when it considereth the offence past, is nothing else,
but present triumph and glory, and directeth to no end: and what is
directed to no end, is therefore unprofitable; and consequently the
triumph of revenge, is vain glory: and whatsoever is vain, is
against reason; and to hurt one another without reason, is contrary
to that, which by supposition is every man’s benefit, namely peace;
and what is contrary to peace, is contrary to the law of nature.

[Sidenote: That reproach and contempt declared is against the law of
           nature.]

11. And because all signs which we shew to one another of hatred and
contempt, provoke in the highest degree to quarrel and battle,
(inasmuch as life itself, with the condition of enduring scorn, is
not esteemed worth the enjoying, much less peace) it must
necessarily be implied as a law of nature, _That no man reproach,
revile, deride, or any otherwise declare his hatred, contempt, or
disesteem of any other_. But this law is very little practised. For
what is more ordinary than reproaches of those that are rich,
towards them that are not? or of those that sit in place of
judicature, towards those that are accused at the bar? although to
grieve them in that manner, be no part of the punishment for their
crime, nor contained in their office. But use hath prevailed, that
what was lawful in the lord towards the servant whom he maintaineth,
is also practised as lawful in the more mighty towards the less;
though they contribute nothing towards their maintenance.

[Sidenote: That indifference of commerce is of the law of nature.]

12. It is also a law of nature, _That one man allow commerce and
traffic indifferently to one another_. For he that alloweth that to
one man, which he denieth to another, declareth his hatred to him,
to whom he denieth. And to declare hatred is war. And upon this
title was grounded the great war between the Athenians and the
Peloponnesians. For would the Athenians have condescended to suffer
the Megareans, their neighbours, to traffic in their ports and
markets, that war had not begun.

[Sidenote: That messengers employed to procure or maintain peace,
           ought to be safe by the law of nature.]

13. And this also is a law of nature, _That all messengers of peace,
and such as are employed to procure and maintain amity between man
and man, may safely come and go_. For seeing peace is the general
law of nature, the means thereto, such as are these men, must in the
same law be comprehended.

sp 2


                                -------


                              CHAPTER IV.

1. A law of nature, that every man acknowledge other for his equal.
    2. Another, that men allow _æqualia æqualibus_. 3. Another, that
    those things which cannot be divided, be used in common. 4.
    Another, that things indivisible and incommunicable, be divided
    by lot. 5. Natural lot, primogeniture, and first possession. 6.
    That men submit to arbitration. 7. Of an arbitrator. 8. That no
    man press his counsel upon any man against his will. 9. How to
    know suddenly what is the law of nature. 10. That the law of
    nature taketh place after security from others to observe the
    same. 11. The right of nature not to be taken away by custom,
    nor the law of nature abrogated by any act. 12. Why the dictates
    of nature are called laws. 13. Whatsoever is against conscience
    in a man that is his own judge, is against the law of nature.
    14. Of _malum pœnæ, malum culpæ_; virtue and vice. 15. Aptitude
    to society fulfilleth the law of nature.


[Sidenote: A law of nature, that every man acknowledge other for his
           equal.]

1. The question, which is the better man, is determinable only in
the estate of government and policy, though it be mistaken for a
question of nature, not only by ignorant men, that think one man’s
blood better than another’s by nature, but also by him, whose
opinions are at this day, and in these parts, of greater authority
than any other human writings. For he putteth so much difference
between the powers of men by nature, that he doubteth not to set
down, as the ground of all his politics, that some men are by nature
worthy to govern, and others by nature ought to serve. Which
foundation hath not only weakened the whole frame of his politics,
but hath also given men colour and pretences, whereby to disturb and
hinder the peace of one another. For though there were such a
difference of nature, that master and servant were not by consent of
men, but by inherent virtue; yet who hath that eminency of virtue,
above others, and who is so stupid, as not to govern himself, shall
never be agreed upon amongst men, who do every one naturally think
himself, as able, at the least, to govern another, as another to
govern him. And when there was any contention between the finer and
the courser wits, (as there hath been often in times of sedition and
civil war) for the most part, these latter carried away the victory;
and as long as men arrogate to themselves more honour than they give
to others, it cannot be imagined, how they can possibly live in
peace: and consequently we are to suppose, that for peace sake,
nature hath ordained this law, _That every man acknowledge other for
his equal_. And the breach of this law, is that we call _pride_.

[Sidenote: Another, that men allow _æqualia æqualibus_.]

2. As it was necessary that a man should not retain his right to
every thing, so also was it, that he should retain his right to
some things; to his own body, for example, the right of
defending, whereof he could not transfer; to the use of fire,
water, free air, and place to live in, and to all things
necessary for life. Nor doth the law of nature command any
divesting of other rights, than of those only which cannot be
retained without the loss of peace. Seeing then many rights are
retained, when we enter into peace one with another, reason and
the law of nature dictateth, _Whatsoever right any man requireth
to retain, he allow every other man to retain the same_. For he
that doth not so, alloweth not the equality mentioned in the
former section. For there is no acknowledgment of worth, without
attribution of the equality of benefit and respect. And this
allowance of _æqualia æqualibus_, is the same thing with the
allowing of _proportionalia proportionalibus_. For when a man
alloweth to every man alike, the allowance he maketh, will be in
the same proportion, in which are the numbers of men to whom
they are made. And this is it men mean by _distributive
justice_, and is properly termed _equity_. The breach of the law
is that which the Greeks call Πλεονεξία, which is commonly
rendered _covetousness_, but seemeth to be more precisely
expressed by the word _encroaching_.

[Sidenote: Another, that those things which cannot be divided, be
           used in common.]

3. If there pass no other covenant, the law of nature is, _That such
things as cannot be divided, be used in common, proportionably to
the numbers of them that are to use the same, or without limitation,
when the quantity thereof sufficeth_. For first supposing the thing
to be used in common, not sufficient for them that are to use it
without limitation, if a few shall make more use thereof than the
rest, that equality is not observed, which is required in the second
section. And this is to be understood, as all the rest of the laws
of nature, without any other covenant antecedent: for a man may have
given away his right of common, and so the case be altered.

[Sidenote: Another, that things indivisible and incommunicable, be
           divided by lot.]

4. In those things which neither can be divided, nor used in common,
the rule of nature must needs be one of these, _lot_, or _alternate
use_: for besides these two ways, there can no other equality be
imagined; and for alternate use, he that beginneth, hath the
advantage; and to reduce that advantage to equality, there is no
other way but lot, in things, therefore indivisible and
incommunicable, it is the law of nature, _That the use be alternate,
or the advantage given away by lot_; because there is no other way
of equality. And equality is the law of nature.

[Sidenote: Natural lot, primogeniture, and first possession.]

5. There be two sorts of lots; one arbitrary, made by men, and
commonly known by the names of _lot_, _chance_, _hazard_, and the
like; and there is _natural lot_, such as is _primogeniture_, which
is no more but the chance, or lot, of being first born, which it
seemeth they considered, that call inheritance by the name of
κληρονομία, which signifieth _distribution_ by lot. Secondly, _prima
occupatio_, first seizing, or finding of a thing, whereof no man
made use before, which for the most part also is merely _chance_.

[Sidenote: That men submit to arbitration.]

6. Although men agree upon these laws of nature, and endeavour to
observe the same; yet considering the passions of men, that make it
difficult to understand by what actions, and circumstances of
actions, those laws are broken, there must needs arise many great
controversies about the interpretation thereof, by which the peace
must needs be dissolved, and men return again to their former estate
of hostility. For the taking away of which controversies, it is
necessary that there be some common _arbitrator_ and _judge_, to
whose sentence both the parties in the controversies ought to stand.
And therefore it is a law of nature, _That in every controversy, the
parties thereto ought mutually to agree upon an arbitrator, whom
they both trust; and mutually to covenant to stand to the sentence
he shall give therein_. For where every man is his own _judge_,
there properly is no judge at all; as where every man carveth out
his own right, it hath the same effect, as if there were no right at
all: and where is no judge, there is no end of controversy: and
therefore the right of hostility remaineth.

[Sidenote: Of an arbitrator.]

7. An _arbitrator_ therefore, or he that is judge, is trusted by the
parties to any controversy, to determine the same by the declaration
of his own judgment therein. Out of which followeth first, that the
judge ought not to be concerned in the controversy he endeth; for in
that case he is a party, and ought by the same reason to be judged
by another. Secondly, that he maketh no covenant with either of the
parties, to pronounce sentence for the one, more than for the other.
Nor doth he covenant so much, as that his sentence shall be just;
for that were to make the parties judges of the sentence, whereby
the controversy would remain still undecided. Nevertheless for the
trust reposed in him, and for the equality which the law of nature
requireth him to consider in the parties, he violateth that law, if
for favour, or hatred to either party, he give other sentence than
he thinketh right. And thirdly, that no man ought to make himself
judge in any controversy between others, unless they consent and
agree thereto.

[Sidenote: That no man press his counsel upon any man against his
           will.]

8. It is also the law of nature, _That no man obtrude or press his
advice or counsel to any man, that declareth himself unwilling to
hear the same_. For seeing a man taketh counsel concerning what is
good or hurt of himself only, and not of his counsellor, and that
counsel is a voluntary action, and therefore tendeth also to the
good of the counsellor, there may be often just cause to suspect the
counsellor: and though there be none, yet seeing counsel unwillingly
heard, is a needless offence to him that is not willing to hear it,
and offences tend all to the breach of peace, it is therefore
against the law of nature to obtrude it.

[Sidenote: How to know suddenly what is the law of nature.]

9. A man that shall see these laws of nature set down and inferred
with so many words, and so much ado, may think there is yet much
more difficulty and subtlety required to acknowledge and do
according to the said laws in every sudden occasion, when a man hath
but a little time to consider. And while we consider man in most
passions, as of _anger_, _ambition_, _covetousness_, _vain glory_,
and the like, that tend to the excluding of natural equality, it is
true. But without these passions, there is an easy rule to know upon
a sudden, whether the action I be to do, be against the law of
nature, or not. And it is but this: _That a man imagine himself in
place of the party with whom he hath to do, and reciprocally him in
his_. Which is no more but a changing, as it were, of the scales.
For every man’s passion weigheth heavy in his own scale, but not in
the scale of his neighbour. And this rule is very well known and
expressed in this old dictate, _Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris_.

[Sidenote: That the law of nature taketh place after security from
           others to observe the same.]

10. These laws of nature, the sum whereof consisteth in forbidding
us to be our own judges, and our own carvers, and in commanding us
to accommodate one another, in case they should be observed by some,
and not by others, would make the observers but a prey to them that
should neglect them, leaving the good both without defence against
the wicked, and also with a charge to assist them: which is against
the scope of the said laws, that are made only for the protection
and defence of them that keep them. Reason therefore, and the law of
nature over and above all these particular laws, doth dictate this
law in general, _That those particular laws be so far observed, as
they subject us not to any incommodity, that in our own judgments
may arise, by the neglect thereof in those towards whom we observe
them_; and consequently requireth no more but the desire and
constant intention to endeavour and be ready to observe them, unless
there be cause to the contrary in other men’s refusal to observe
them towards us. The force therefore of the law of nature, is not
_in foro externo_, till there be security for men to obey it, but is
always _in foro interno_, wherein the action of obedience being
unsafe, the will and readiness to perform, is taken for the
performance.

[Sidenote: The right of nature not to be taken away by custom, nor
           the law of nature abrogated by any act.]

11. Amongst the laws of nature, customs and prescriptions are not
numbered. For whatsoever action is against reason, though it be
reiterated never so often, or that there be never so many
precedents thereof, is still against reason, and therefore not a
law of nature, but contrary to it. But consent and covenant may so
alter the cases, which in the law of nature may be put, by
changing the circumstances, that that which was reason before, may
afterwards be against it; and yet is reason still the law. For
though every man be bound to allow equality to another, yet if
that other shall see cause to renounce the same, and make himself
inferior, then, if from thenceforth he consider him as inferior,
he breaketh not thereby that law of nature that commandeth to
allow equality. In sum, _a mans own consent may abridge him of the
liberty which the law of nature leaveth him, but custom not_; nor
can either of them abrogate either these, or or any other law of
nature.

[Sidenote: Why the dictates of nature are called laws.]

12. And forasmuch as law, to speak properly, is a command, and these
dictates, as they proceed from nature, are not commands, they are
not therefore called laws, in respect of nature, but in respect of
the author of nature, God Almighty.

[Sidenote: Whatsoever is against conscience in a man, that is his
           own judge, is against the law of nature.]

13. And seeing the laws of nature concern the conscience, not he
only breaketh them that doth any action contrary, but also he whose
action is conformable to them, in case he think it contrary. For
though the action chance to be right, yet in his judgment he
despiseth the law.

[Sidenote: Of _malum pœnæ, malum culpæ_; virtue and vice.]

14. Every man by natural passion, calleth that good which pleaseth
him for the present, or so far forth as he can foresee; and in like
manner, that which displeaseth him, evil. And therefore he that
foreseeth the whole way to his preservation, which is the end that
every one by nature aimeth at, must also call it good, and the
contrary evil. And this is that good and evil, which not every man
in passion calleth so, but all men by reason. And therefore the
fulfilling of all these laws is good in reason, and the breaking of
them evil. And so also the habit, or disposition, or intention to
fulfil them good; and the neglect of them evil. And from hence
cometh that distinction of _malum pœnæ_, and _malum culpæ_; for
_malum pœnæ_ is any pain or molestation of the mind whatsoever; but
_malum culpæ_ is that action which is contrary to reason and the law
of nature: as also the habit of doing according to these and other
laws of nature, that tend to our preservation, is that we call
_virtue_; and the habit of doing the contrary, _vice_. As for
example, justice is that habit by which we stand to covenants,
injustice the contrary vice; equity that habit by which we allow
equality of nature, arrogancy the contrary vice; gratitude the habit
whereby we requite the benefit and trust of others, ingratitude the
contrary vice; temperance the habit by which we abstain from all
things that tend to our destruction, intemperance the contrary vice;
prudence, the same with virtue in general. As for the common
opinion, that virtue consisteth in mediocrity, and vice in extremes,
I see no ground for it, nor can find any such mediocrity. Courage
may be virtue, when the daring is extreme, if the cause be good, and
extreme fear no vice when the danger is extreme. To give a man more
than his due, is no injustice, though it be to give him less: and in
gifts it is not the sum that maketh liberality, but the reason. And
so in all other virtues and vices. I know that this doctrine of
mediocrity is Aristotle’s, but his opinions concerning virtue and
vice, are no other than those, which were received then, and are
still by the generality of men unstudied, and therefore not very
likely to be accurate.

[Sidenote: Aptitude to society, fulfilleth the law of nature.]

15. The sum of virtue is to be sociable with them that will be
sociable, and formidable to them that will not. And the same is the
sum of the law of nature: for in being sociable, the law of nature
taketh place by way of peace and society; and to be formidable, is
the law of nature in war, where to be feared is a protection a man
hath from his own power: and as the former consisteth in actions of
equity and justice, the latter consisteth in actions of honour. And
equity, justice, and honour, contain all virtues whatsoever.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER V.

A Confirmation out of Holy Scripture of the principal points
    mentioned in the two last Chapters concerning the Law of Nature.


[Sidenote: Confirmation out of Scripture, &c.]

1. The laws mentioned in the former chapters, as they are called the
laws of nature, for that they are the dictates of natural reason,
and also moral laws, because they concern the manners and
conversation of men, one towards another; so are they also divine
laws in respect of the author thereof, God Almighty; and ought
therefore to agree, or at least, not to be repugnant to the word of
God revealed in Holy Scripture. In this chapter therefore, I shall
produce such places of Scripture, as appear to be most consonant to
the said laws.

2. And first, the word of God seemeth to place the divine law in
reason, by all such texts as ascribe the same to the heart and
understanding; as Psalm xl. 8: _Thy law is in my heart_. Heb. viii.
10: _After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my laws in their
mind_: and Heb. x. 16, the same. Psalm xxxvii. 31, speaking of the
righteous man, he saith, _The law of God is in his heart_. Psalm
xix. 7, 8: _The law of God is perfect, converting the soul. It
giveth wisdom to the simple, and, light unto the eyes_. Jer. xxxi.
33: _I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts_. And (John i.) the lawgiver himself, God Almighty, is called
by the name of Λόγος, which is also called (verse 4) _The light of
men_; and (verse 9) _The light which lighteth every man, which
cometh into the world_. All which are descriptions of natural
reason.

3. And that the law divine, for so much as is moral, are those
precepts which tend to peace, seemeth to be much confirmed by such
places of Scripture as these: Rom. iii. 17, righteousness which is
the fulfilling of the law, is called _The way of peace_. And Psalm
lxxxv. 10: _Righteousness and peace shall kiss each other_. And
Matth. v. 9: _Blessed are the peace-makers_. And Heb. vii. 2,
_Melchisedec king of Salem_ is interpreted _king of righteousness_,
and _king of peace_. And (verse 21) our Saviour Christ is said to be
_a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec_: out of which may
be inferred, that the doctrine of our Saviour Christ annexeth the
fulfilling of the law to peace.

4. That the law of nature is unalterable, is intimated by this, that
the priesthood of Melchisedec is everlasting; and by the words of
our Saviour, (Matth. v. 18): _Heaven and earth shall pass away, but
one jot or tittle of the law shall not pass till all things be
fulfilled_.

5. That men ought to stand to their covenants, is taught Psalm xv,
where the question being asked (verse 1), _Lord who shall dwell in
thy tabernacle_, &c. It is answered (verse 4), _He that sweareth to
his own hindrance, and yet changeth not_. And that men ought to be
gratified, where no covenant passeth, Deut. xxv. 4: _Thou shalt not
muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn_, which St. Paul (1 Cor.
ix. 9) interpreteth not of oxen but of men.

6. That men content themselves with equality, as it is the
foundation of natural law, so also is it of the second table, of the
divine law, Matth. xxii. 39, 40: _Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself. On these two laws depend the whole law and the prophets_;
which is not so to be understood, as that a man should study so much
his neighbour’s profit as his own, or that he should divide his
goods amongst his neighbours; but that he should esteem his
neighbour worthy all rights and privileges that himself enjoyeth;
and attribute unto him, whatsoever he looketh should be attributed
unto himself: which is no more, but that he should be humble, meek,
and content with equality.

7. And that in distributing of right amongst equals, that
distribution is to be made according to the proportions of
the numbers, which is the giving of _æqualia æqualibus, et
proportionalia proportionalibus_; we have Numb. xxvi. 53, 54, the
commandment of God to Moses: _Thou shalt divide the land according
to the number of names; to many thou shalt give more, to few thou
shalt give less, to every one according to his number_. That
decision by lot is a means of peace, Prov. xviii. 18: _The lot
causeth contention to cease, and maketh partition among the mighty_.

8. That the accommodation and forgiveness of one another, which have
before been put for laws of nature, are also law divine, there is no
question. For they are the essence of charity, which is the scope of
the whole law. That we ought not to reproach, or reprehend one
another, is the doctrine of our Saviour, Matth. vii. 1: _Judge not,
that ye be not judged_: (verse 3): _Why seest thou the mote that is
in thy brother’s eye, and seest not the beam that is in thine own
eye?_ Also the law that forbiddeth us to press our counsel upon
others further than they admit, is a divine law. For after our
charity and desire to rectify one another is rejected, to press it
further, is to reprehend him, and condemn him, which is forbidden in
the text last recited; as also Rom. xiv. 12, 13: _Every one of us
shall give account of himself to God. Let us not therefore judge one
another any more, but use your judgment rather in this, that no man
put an occasion to fall, or a stumbling block before his brother._

9. Further, the rule of men concerning the law of nature, _Quod tibi
fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris_, is confirmed by the like, Matth.
vii. 12: _Whatsoever therefore you would have men do unto you, that
do you unto them: for this is the law and the prophets_. And Rom.
ii. 1: _In that thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself_, &c.

10. It is also manifest by the Scriptures, that these laws concern
only the tribunal of our conscience; and that the actions contrary
to them, shall be no further punished by God Almighty, than as they
proceed from negligence, or contempt. And first, that these laws are
made to the conscience, appeareth, Matth. v. 20: _For I say unto
you, except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven._ Now the Pharisees were the most exact amongst the Jews in
the external performance; they therefore must want the sincerity of
conscience; else could not our Saviour have required a greater
righteousness than theirs. For the same reason our Saviour Christ
saith (Luke, xviii. 14): _The publican departed from the temple
justified, rather than the Pharisee_. And Christ saith, (Matth. xi.
30): _My yoke is easy, and my burthen light_; which proceedeth from
this, that Christ required no more than our best endeavour. And Rom.
xiv. 23: _He that doubteth, is condemned, if he eat_. And in
innumerable places both in the Old and New Testament, God Almighty
declareth, that he taketh the will for the deed, both in good and
evil actions. By all which it plainly appears, that the divine law
is dictated to the conscience. On the other side it is no less
plain, that how many and heinous actions soever a man commit through
infirmity, he shall nevertheless, whensoever he shall condemn the
same in his own conscience, be freed from the punishments that to
such actions otherwise belong. For, _At what time soever a sinner
doth repent him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, I will put
all his iniquities out of my remembrance, saith the Lord_.

11. Concerning revenge, which by the law of nature ought not to aim,
as I have said chapter III. section 10, at present delight, but
future profit, there is some difficulty made, as if the same
accorded not with the law divine, by such as object the continuance
of punishment after the day of judgment, when there shall be no
place, neither for amendment, nor for example. This objection had
been of some force, if such punishment had been ordained after all
sins were past; but considering the punishment was instituted before
sin, it serveth to the benefit of mankind, because it keepeth men in
peaceable and virtuous conversation by the terror. And therefore
such revenge was directed to the future only.

12. Finally, there is no law of natural reason, that can be against
the law divine: for God Almighty hath given reason to a man to be a
light unto him. And I hope it is no impiety to think, that God
Almighty will require a strict account thereof, at the day of
judgment, as of the instructions which we were to follow in our
peregrination here, notwithstanding the opposition and affronts of
supernaturalists now a-days, to rational and moral conversation.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER VI.

1. That men, notwithstanding these laws, are still in the state of
    war, till they have security one against another. 2. The law of
    nature in war, is nothing but honour. 3. No security without the
    concord of many. 4. That concord of many cannot be maintained
    without power to keep them all in awe. 5. The cause why concord
    remaineth in a multitude of some irrational creatures, and not
    of men. 6. That union is necessary for the maintaining of
    concord. 7. How union is made. 8. Body politic defined. 9.
    Corporation defined. 10. Sovereign and subject defined. 11. Two
    sorts of bodies politic, patrimonial and commonwealth.


[Sidenote: That men, notwithstanding these laws, are still in the
           state of war, till they have security one against
           another.]

1. In chapter XII. section 6, of the _Treatise of Human Nature_, it
hath been shewed, that the opinions men have of the rewards and
punishments which are to follow their actions, are the causes that
make and govern the will to those actions. In this estate of man
therefore, wherein all men are equal, and every man allowed to be
his own judge, the fears they have one of another are equal, and
every man’s hopes consist in his own sleight and strength: and
consequently when any man by his natural passion, is provoked to
break these laws of nature, there is no security in any other man of
his own defence but _anticipation_. And for this cause, every man’s
right, howsoever he be inclined to peace, of doing whatsoever
seemeth good in his own eyes, remaineth with him still, as the
necessary means of his preservation. And therefore till there be
security amongst men for the keeping of the law of nature one
towards another, men are still in the estate of war, and nothing is
unlawful to any man that tendeth to his own safety or commodity: and
this safety and commodity consisteth in the mutual aid and help of
one another, whereby also followeth the mutual fear of one another.

[Sidenote: The law of nature in war, is nothing but honour.]

2. It is a proverbial saying, _inter arma silent leges_. There is a
little therefore to be said concerning the laws that men are to
observe one towards another in time of war, wherein every man’s
being and well-being is the rule of his actions. Yet thus much the
law of nature commandeth in war, that men satiate not the cruelty of
their present passions, whereby in their own conscience they foresee
no benefit to come. For that betrayeth not a necessity, but a
disposition of the mind to war, which is against the law of nature.
And in old time we read, that rapine was a trade of life, wherein
nevertheless many of them that used it, did not only spare the lives
of those they invaded, but left them also such things, as were
necessary to preserve that life which they had given them; as namely
their oxen and instruments for tillage, though they carried away all
their other cattle and substance. And as the rapine itself was
warranted in the law of nature, by the want of security otherwise to
maintain themselves, so the exercise of cruelty was forbidden by the
same law of nature, unless fear suggested anything to the contrary.
For nothing but fear can justify the taking away of another’s life.
And because fear can hardly be made manifest, but by some action
dishonourable, that bewrayeth the conscience of one’s own weakness,
all men, in whom the passion of courage or magnanimity hath been
predominant, have abstained from cruelty; insomuch, that though
there be in war no law, the breach whereof is injury, yet there are
in war those laws, the breach whereof is dishonour. In one word,
therefore, the only law of actions in war, is _honour_; and the
right of war, _providence_.

[Sidenote: No security without the concord of many.]

3. And seeing natural aid is necessary for defence, as mutual fear
is necessary for peace, we are to consider how great aids are
required for such defence, and for the causing of such mutual fear,
as men may not easily adventure on one another. And first, it is
evident, that the mutual aid of two or three men is of very little
security. For the odds on the other side, of a man or two, giveth
sufficient encouragement to an assault. And therefore before men
have sufficient security in the help of one another, their number
must be so great, that the odds of a few which the enemy may have,
be no certain and sensible advantage.

[Sidenote: That concord of many cannot be maintained without power
           to keep them all in awe.]

4. And supposing how great a number soever of men assembled together
for their mutual defence, yet shall not the effect follow, unless
they all direct their actions to one and the same end; which
direction to one and the same end is that which, chap. XII. sect. 7,
is called _consent_. This _consent_, or concord, amongst so many
men, though it may be made by the fear of a present invader, or by
the hope of a present conquest, or booty, and endure as long as that
action endureth, nevertheless, by the diversity of judgments and
passions in so many men contending naturally for honour and
advantage one above another, it is impossible, not only that their
consent to aid each other against an enemy, but also that the peace
should last between themselves, without some mutual and common fear
to rule them.

[Sidenote: The cause why concord remaineth in a multitude of some
           irrational creatures, and not of men.]

5. But contrary hereunto may be objected, the experience we have of
certain living creatures irrational, that nevertheless continually
live in such good order and government for their common benefit, and
are so free from sedition and war amongst themselves, that for
peace, profit, and defence, nothing more can be imaginable. And the
experience we have in this, is in that little creature the bee,
which is therefore reckoned amongst _animalia politica_. Why
therefore may not men, that foresee the benefit of concord,
continually maintain the same without compulsion, as well as they?
To which I answer, that amongst other living creatures, there is no
question of precedence in their own species, nor strife about
honour, or acknowledgment of one another’s wisdom, as there is
amongst men, from whence arise envy and hatred of one towards
another, and from thence sedition and war. Secondly, those living
creatures aim every one at peace and food common to them all; men
aim at dominion, superiority, and private wealth, which are distinct
in every man, and breed contention. Thirdly, those living creatures
that are without reason, have not learning enough to espy, or to
think they espy, any defect in the government; and therefore are
contented therewith. But in a multitude of men, there are always
some that think themselves wiser than the rest, and strive to alter
what they think amiss, and divers of them strive to alter divers
ways, and that causeth war. Fourthly, they want speech, and are
therefore unable to instigate one another to faction, which men want
not. Fifthly, they have no conception of right and wrong, but only
of pleasure and pain, and therefore also no censure of one another,
nor of their commander, as long as they are themselves at ease;
whereas men that make themselves judges of right and wrong, are then
least at quiet, when they are most at ease. Lastly, natural concord,
such as is amongst those creatures, is the work of God by the way of
nature; but concord amongst men is artificial, and by way of
covenant. And therefore no wonder, if such irrational creatures as
govern themselves in multitude, do it much more firmly than mankind,
that do it by arbitrary institution.

[Sidenote: That union is necessary for the maintaining of concord.]

6. It remaineth therefore still, that consent, by which I understand
the concurrence of many men’s wills to one action, is not sufficient
security for their common peace, without the erection of some common
power, by the fear whereof they may be compelled both to keep the
peace amongst themselves, and to join their strengths together,
against a common enemy. And that this may be done, there is no way
imaginable, but only union, which is defined, chapter XII. section
8, to be the involving, or including the wills of many in the will
of one man, or in the will of the greatest part of any one number of
men, that is to say, in the will of one man, or of one _council_.
For a council is nothing else but an _assembly_ of men deliberating
concerning something common to them all.

[Sidenote: How union is made.]

7. The making of union consisteth in this, that every man by
covenant oblige himself to some one and the same man, or to some one
and the same council, by them all named and determined, to do those
actions, which the said man or council shall command them to do, and
to do no action, which he or they shall forbid, or command them not
to do. And further, in case it be a council, whose commands they
covenant to obey, that then also they covenant, that every man shall
hold that for the command of the whole council, which is the command
of the greater part of those men, whereof such council consisteth.
And though the will of man being not voluntary, but the beginning of
voluntary actions, is not subject to deliberation and covenant; yet
when a man covenanteth to subject his will to the command of
another, he obligeth himself to this, that he resign his strength
and means to him, whom he covenanteth to obey. And hereby he that is
to command, may by the use of all their means and strength, be able
by the terror thereof, to frame the will of them all to unity and
concord, amongst themselves.

[Sidenote: Body politic defined.]

8. This union so made, is that which men call now a-days, a _body
politic_, or civil society; and the Greeks call it πόλις, that is to
say, a city, which may be defined to be a multitude of men, united
as one person, by a common power, for their common peace, defence,
and benefit.

[Sidenote: Corporation defined.]

9. And as this union into a city or body politic, is instituted with
common power over all the particular persons, or members thereof, to
the common good of them all; so also may there be amongst a
multitude of those members instituted, a subordinate union of
certain men, for certain common actions to be done by those men for
some common benefit of theirs, or of the whole city; as for
subordinate government, for counsel, for trade, and the like. And
these subordinate bodies politic are usually called _corporations_;
and their power such over the particulars of their own society, as
the whole city, whereof they are members, have allowed them.

[Sidenote: Sovereign and subject defined.]

10. In all cities, or bodies politic not subordinate, but
independent, that one man, or one council, to whom the particular
members have given that common power, is called their _sovereign_,
and his power, the sovereign power; which consisteth in the power
and the strength, that every of the members have transferrred to him
from themselves by covenant. And because it is impossible for any
man really to transfer his own strength to another, or for that
other to receive it; it is to be understood, that to transfer a
man’s power and strength, is no more but to lay by, or relinquish
his own right of resisting him to whom he so transferreth it. And
every member of the body politic, is called a _subject_, to wit, to
the _sovereign_.

[Sidenote: Two sorts of bodies politic, patrimonial and
           commonwealth.]

11. The cause in general, which moveth a man to become subject to
another, is (as I have said already) the fear of not otherwise
preserving himself. And a man may subject himself to him that
invadeth, or may invade him, for fear of him; or men may join
amongst themselves, to subject themselves to such as they shall
agree upon for fear of others. And when many men subject themselves
the former way, there ariseth thence a body politic, as it were
naturally. From whence proceedeth _dominion_, _paternal_ and
_despotic_. And when they subject themselves the other way, by
mutual agreement amongst many, the body politic they make, is for
the most part, called a _commonwealth_, in distinction from the
former, though the name be the general name for them both. And I
shall speak in the first place of commonwealths, and afterwards of
bodies politic, patrimonial, and despotical.




                            THE SECOND PART.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER I.

1. Introduction. 2. A multitude before their union, &c. 3.
    Express consent of every particular, &c. 4. Democratical,
    aristocratical, and monarchical union may be instituted for
    ever, or, &c. 5. Without security no private right relinquished.
    6. Covenants of government, without power of coercion, are no
    security. 7. Power coercive, &c. 8. The sword of war, &c. 9.
    Decision in all debates, &c. annexed to the sword. 10. Laws
    civil, &c. 11. Appointment of magistrates, &c. 12. Sovereign
    power includeth impunity. 13. A supposed commonwealth, where
    laws are made first, and the commonwealth after. 14. The same
    refelled. 15. Mixed forms of government supposed in sovereignty.
    16. That refelled. 17. Mixed government, &c. 18. Reason and
    experience to prove absolute sovereignty somewhere in all
    commonwealths. 19. Some principal, &c. marks of sovereignty.


[Sidenote: Introduction.]

1. That _Treatise of Human Nature_, which was formerly printed, hath
been wholly spent in the consideration of the natural power, and the
natural estate of man, namely, of his cognition and passions in the
first eleven chapters, and how from thence proceed his actions; in
the twelfth, how men know one another’s minds: in the last, in what
estate men’s passions set them. In the first, second, third, fourth,
and fifth chapters of the former Part of this Treatise is showed,
what estate they are directed unto by the dictates of reason, that
is to say, what be the principal articles of the law of nature. And
lastly, how a multitude of persons natural, are united by covenants
into one person civil, or body politic. In this part therefore shall
be considered, the nature of a body politic, and the laws thereof,
otherwise called civil laws. And whereas it hath been said in the
last chapter, and last section of the former part, that there be two
ways of erecting a body politic; one by arbitrary institution of
many men assembled together, which is like a creation out of nothing
by human wit; the other by compulsion, which is as it were a
generation thereof out of natural force; I shall first speak of such
erection of a body politic, as proceedeth from the assembly and
consent of a multitude.

[Sidenote: A multitude before their union, &c.]

2. Having in this place to consider, a multitude of men about to
unite themselves into a body politic, for their security, both
against one another, and against common enemies, and that by
covenants; the knowledge of what covenants they must needs make,
dependeth on the knowledge of the persons, and the knowledge of
their end. First, for their persons they are many, and (as yet) not
one; nor can any action done in a multitude of people met together,
be attributed to the multitude, or truly called the action of the
multitude, unless every man’s hand, and every man’s will, (not so
much as one excepted) have concurred thereto. For multitude, though
in their persons they run together, yet they concur not always in
their designs. For even at that time when men are in tumult, though
they agree a number of them to one mischief, and a number of them to
another; yet, in the whole, they are amongst themselves in the state
of hostility, and not of peace; like the seditious Jews besieged in
Jerusalem, that could join against their enemies, and fight amongst
themselves. Whensoever therefore any man saith, that a number of men
hath done any act, it is to be understood, that every particular man
in that number hath consented thereunto, and not the greatest part
only. Secondly, though thus assembled with intention to unite
themselves, they are yet in that estate in which every man hath
right to everything, and consequently, as hath been said, chapter I.
section 10, in an estate of enjoying nothing. And therefore _meum_
and _tuum_ hath no place amongst them.

[Sidenote: Express consent of every particular, &c.]

3. The first thing therefore they are to do, is expressly every man
to consent to something, by which they may come near to their ends,
which can be nothing else imaginable, but this, that they allow the
wills of the major part of their whole number, or the wills of the
major part of some certain number of men by them determined and
named; or lastly, the will of some one man, to involve and be taken
for the wills of every man. And this done, they are united, and a
_body politic_. And if the major part of their whole number be
supposed to involve the wills of all the particulars, then are they
said to be a _democracy_, that is to say, a government wherein the
whole number, or so many of them as please, being assembled
together, are the sovereign, and every particular man a subject. If
the major part of a certain number of men named or distinguished
from the rest, be supposed to involve the wills of every one of the
particulars, then are they said to be an _oligarchy_, or
_aristocracy_, which two words signify the same thing, together with
the divers passions of those that use them. For when the men that be
in that office please, they are called an aristocracy, or otherwise
an oligarchy, wherein those, the major part of which declare the
wills of the whole multitude being assembled, are the sovereign, and
every man severally a subject. Lastly, if their consent be such,
that the will of one man, whom they name, shall stand for the wills
of them all, then is their government or union called a _monarchy_,
and that one man a sovereign, and every of the rest a subject.

[Sidenote: Democratical, aristocratical, and monarchical union may
           be instituted for ever.]

4. And those several sorts of unions, governments, and subjections
of man’s will, may be understood to be made, either absolutely, that
is to say, for all future time, or for a time limited only. But
forasmuch as we speak here of a body politic, instituted for the
perpetual benefit and defence of them that make it; which therefore
men desire should last for ever, I will omit to speak of those that
be temporary, and consider of those that be for ever.

[Sidenote: Without security no private right relinquished.]

5. The end for which one man giveth up, and relinquisheth to
another, or others, the right of protecting and defending himself by
his own power, is the security which he expecteth thereby, of
protection and defence from those to whom he doth so relinquish it;
and a man may then account himself in the estate of security, when
he can foresee no violence to be done unto him, from which the doer
may not be deterred by the power of that sovereign, to whom they
have every one subjected themselves: and without that security,
there is no reason for a man to deprive himself of his own
advantages, and make himself a prey to others. And therefore when
there is not such a sovereign power erected, as may afford this
security, it is to be understood, that every man’s right of doing
whatsoever seemeth good in his own eyes, remaineth still with him;
and contrariwise, where any subject hath right by his own judgment
and discretion, to make use of his force, it is to be understood,
that every man hath the like, and consequently, that there is no
commonwealth at all established. How far therefore in the making of
a commonwealth, man subjecteth his will to the power of others, must
appear from the end, namely, security. For whatsoever is necessary
to be by covenant transferred, for the attaining thereof, so much is
transferred, or else every man is in his natural liberty to secure
himself.

[Sidenote: Covenants of government without power of coercion, are no
           security.]

6. Covenants agreed upon by every man assembled for the making of a
commonwealth, and put in writing without erecting of a power of
coercion, are no reasonable security for any of them that so
covenant, nor are to be called laws, and leave men still in the
estate of nature and hostility. For seeing the wills of most men are
governed only by fear, and where there is no power of coercion,
there is no fear, the wills of most men will follow their passions
of covetousness, lust, anger, and the like, to the breaking of those
covenants, whereby the rest, also, who otherwise would keep them,
are set at liberty, and have no law, but from themselves.

[Sidenote: Power coercive, &c.]

7. This power of coercion, as hath been said, chap. II. sect. 3, of
the former part, consisteth in the transferring of every man’s right
of resistance against him, to whom he hath transferred the power of
coercion. It followeth therefore, that no man in any commonwealth
whatsoever, hath right to resist him, or them, to whom they have
transferred this power coercive, or (as men use to call it) the
sword of justice, supposing the not-resistance possible. For, Part
I. chapter II. sect. 18, covenants bind but to the utmost of our
endeavour.

[Sidenote: The sword of war, &c.]

8. And forasmuch as they who are amongst themselves in security, by
the means of this sword of justice, that keeps them all in awe, are
nevertheless in danger of enemies from without, if there be not some
means found, to unite their strengths and natural forces, in the
resistance of such enemies, their peace amongst themselves is but in
vain. And therefore it is to be understood as a covenant of every
member to contribute their several forces for the defence of the
whole, whereby to make one power as sufficient, as is possible for
their defence. Now seeing that every man hath already transferred
the use of his strength to him, or them, that have the sword of
justice, it followeth, that the power of defence, that is to say,
the sword of war, be in the same hands wherein is the sword of
justice; and consequently those two swords are but one, and that
inseparably and essentially annexed to the sovereign power.

[Sidenote: Decision in all debates, &c. annexed to the sword.]

9. Moreover, seeing to have the right of the sword, is nothing else
but to have the use thereof depending only on the judgment and
discretion of him or them that have it, it followeth, that the power
of indenture in all controversies, wherein the sword of justice is
to be used; and in all deliberations concerning war, wherein the use
of that sword is required, the right of resolving and determining
what is to be done, belong to the same sovereign.

[Sidenote: Laws civil, &c.]

10. Further, considering it is no less, but much more necessary to
prevent violence and rapine, than to punish the same when it is
committed, and all violence proceedeth from controversies that arise
between men concerning _meum_ and _tuum_, right and wrong, good and
bad, and the like, which men use every one to measure by their own
judgments, it belongeth also to the judgment of the same sovereign
power, to set forth and make known the common measure by which every
man is to know what is his, and what another’s; what is good, and
what bad, and what he ought to do, and what not, and to command the
same to be observed. And these measures of the actions of the
subjects are those, which men call _laws politic_, or civil: the
making whereof, must of right belong to him that hath the power of
the sword, by which men are compelled to observe them; for otherwise
they should be made in vain.

[Sidenote: Appointment of magistrates, &c.]

11. Furthermore, seeing it is impossible that any one man that hath
such sovereign power, can be able, in person, to hear and determine
all controversies, to be present at all deliberations concerning
common good, and to execute and perform all those common actions
that belong thereunto, whereby there will be necessity of
magistrates and ministers of public affairs; it is consequent, that
the appointment, nomination, and limitation of the same be
understood, as an inseparable part of the same sovereignty, to which
the sum of all judicature, and execution, hath been already annexed.

[Sidenote: Sovereign power includeth impunity.]

12. And forasmuch, as the right to use the forces of every
particular member, is transferred from themselves, to their
sovereign, a man will easily fall upon this conclusion of himself,
that to sovereign power, whatsoever it doth, there belongeth
impunity.

[Sidenote: A supposed commonwealth where laws are made first, and
           the commonwealth after.]

13. The sum of these rights of sovereignty; namely, the absolute use
of the sword in peace and war, the making and abrogating of laws,
_supreme judicature, and decision_, in all debates judicial and
deliberative, the nomination of all magistrates and ministers, with
other rights contained in the same, make the sovereign power no less
absolute in the commonwealth, than before commonwealth every man was
absolute in himself, to do, or not to do, what he thought good;
which men, that have not had the experience of that miserable
estate, to which men are reduced by long war, think so hard a
condition, that they cannot easily acknowledge such covenants, and
subjection on their parts, as are here set down, to have been ever
necessary to their peace. And therefore some have imagined, that a
commonwealth may be constituted in such manner, as the sovereign
power may be so limited, and moderated, as they shall think fit
themselves. For example: they suppose a multitude of men to have
agreed upon certain articles, which they presently call laws,
declaring how they will be governed, and that done, to agree further
upon some man, or number of men, to see the same articles performed,
and put in execution; and to enable him, or them, thereunto, they
allot unto them a provision limited, as of certain lands, taxes,
penalties, and the like, than which, if mispent, they shall have no
more, without a new consent of the same men that allowed the former.
And thus they think they have made a commonwealth, in which it is
unlawful for any private man to make use of his own sword for his
security; wherein they deceive themselves.

[Sidenote: The same refelled.]

14. For first, if to the revenue, it did necessarily follow, that
there might be forces raised and procured at the will of him that
hath such revenue; yet since the revenue is limited, so must also
the forces: but limited forces against the power of an enemy, which
we cannot limit, are unsufficient. Whensoever therefore there
happeneth an invasion greater than those forces are able to resist,
and there be no other right to levy more, then is every man, by
necessity of nature, allowed to make the best provision he can for
himself; and thus is the private sword, and the estate of war again
reduced. But seeing revenue, without the right of commanding men, is
of no use, neither in peace, nor war, it is necessary to be
supposed, that he that hath the administration of those articles,
which are in the former section supposed, must have also right to
make use of the strengths of particular men. And what reason soever
giveth him that right over any one, giveth him the same over all.
And then is his right absolute. For he that hath right to all their
forces, hath right to dispose of the same. Again, supposing those
limited forces and revenue, either by the necessary, or negligent
use of them, to fail, and that for a supply, the same multitude be
again to be assembled, who shall have power to assemble them, that
is to compel them to come together? If he that demandeth the supply
hath that right, to wit, the right to compel them all, then is his
sovereignty absolute; if not, then is every particular man at
liberty to come or not; to frame a new commonwealth, or not, and so
the right of the private sword returneth. But suppose them
willingly, and of their own accord, assembled to consider of this
supply, if now it be still in their choice, whether they shall give
it, or not, it is also in their choice, whether the commonwealth
shall stand or not. And therefore there lieth not upon any of them
any civil obligation that may hinder them from using force, in case
they think it tend to their defence. This device therefore of them
that will make civil laws first, and then a civil body afterwards,
(as if policy made a body politic, and not a body politic made
policy) is of no effect.

[Sidenote: Mixed forms of government supposed in sovereignty.]

15. Others, to avoid the hard condition, as they take it, of
absolute subjection, which, in hatred thereto, they also call
slavery, have devised a government, as they think, mixed of the
three sorts of sovereignty. As for example: they suppose the power
of making laws, given to some great assembly democratical, the power
of judicature to some other assembly, and the administration of the
laws to a third, or to some one man; and this policy they call mixed
monarchy, or mixed aristocracy, or mixed democracy, according as any
of these three sorts do most visibly predominate. And in this estate
of government, they think the use of the private sword excluded.

[Sidenote: That refelled.]

16. And supposing it were so, how were this condition, which they
call _slavery_, eased thereby. For in this estate they would have no
man allowed, either to be his own judge, or own carver, or to make
any laws unto himself; and as long as these three agree, they are as
absolutely subject to them, as is a child to the father, or a slave
to the master, in the state of nature. The ease therefore of this
subjection, must consist in the disagreement of those amongst whom
they have distributed the rights of sovereign power. But the same
disagreement is war. The division therefore of the sovereignty,
either worketh no effect to the taking away of simple subjection, or
introduceth war, wherein the private sword hath place again. But the
truth is, as hath been already showed in the seventh, eighth, ninth,
tenth, eleventh, and twelfth precedent sections, the sovereignty is
indivisible. And that seeming mixture of several kinds of
government, is not mixture of the things themselves, but confusion
in our understandings, that cannot find out readily to whom we have
subjected ourselves.

[Sidenote: Mixed government, &c.]

17. But though the sovereignty be not mixed, but be always either
simple democracy, or simple aristocracy, or pure monarchy,
nevertheless in the administration thereof, all those sorts of
government may have place subordinate. For suppose the sovereign
power be democracy, as it was sometimes in Rome, yet at the same
time they may have a council aristocratical, such as was the senate;
and at the same time they may have a subordinate monarch, such as
was their dictator, who had, for a time, the exercise of the whole
sovereignty, and such as are all generals in war. So also in
monarchy there may be a council aristocratical of men, chosen by the
monarch; or democratical of men, chosen by the consent, the monarch
permitting, of all the particular men of the commonwealth. And this
mixture is it that imposeth, as if it were the mixture of
sovereignty. As if a man should think, because the great council of
Venice doth nothing ordinarily but choose magistrates, ministers of
state, captains, and governors of towns, ambassadors, counsellors,
and the like, that therefore their part of the sovereignty is only
choosing of magistrates; and that the making of war, and peace, and
laws, were not theirs, but the part of such counsellors as they
appointed thereto: whereas it is the part of _these_ to do it but
subordinately, the supreme authority thereof being in the great
council that choose them.

[Sidenote: Reason and experience to prove absolute sovereignty
           somewhere in all commonwealths.]

18. And as reason teacheth us, that a man, considered out of
subjection to laws, and out of all covenants obligatory to others,
is free to do and undo, and deliberate as long as he listeth, every
member being obedient to the will of the whole man, that liberty
being nothing else but his natural power, without which he is no
better than an inanimate creature, not able to help himself; so also
it teacheth us, that a body politic, of what kind soever, not
subject to another, nor obliged by covenants, ought to be free, and
in all actions to be assisted by the members, every one in their
place, or at least, not resisted by them. For otherwise, the power
of a body politic, the essence whereof is the not-resistance of the
members, is none, nor a body politic of any benefit. And the same is
confirmed by the use of all nations and commonwealths, wherein that
man or council, which is virtually the whole, hath any absolute
power over every particular member; or what nation or commonwealth
is there, that hath not power and right to constitute a general in
their wars? But the power of a general is absolute; and consequently
there was absolute power in the commonwealth, from whom it was
derived. For no person, natural or civil, can transfer unto another
more power than himself hath.

[Sidenote: Some principal, &c. marks of sovereignty.]

19. In every commonwealth, where particular men are deprived of
their right to protect themselves, there resideth an absolute
sovereignty, as I have already showed. But in what man, or in what
assembly of men the same is placed, is not so manifest, as not to
need some marks, whereby it may be discerned. And first, it is an
infallible mark of absolute sovereignty in a man, or in an assembly
of men, if there be no right in any other person, natural or civil,
to punish that man, or to dissolve that assembly. For he that cannot
of right be punished, cannot of right be resisted; and he that
cannot of right be resisted, hath coercive power over all the rest,
and thereby can frame and govern their actions at his pleasure,
which is absolute sovereignty. Contrariwise, he that in a
commonwealth is punishable by any, or that assembly that is
dissolvable, is not sovereign. For a greater power is always
required to punish and dissolve, than theirs who are punished or
dissolved; and that power cannot be called sovereign, than which
there is a greater. Secondly, that man or assembly, that by their
own right not derived from the present right of any other, may make
laws, or abrogate them at his or their pleasure, have the
sovereignty absolute. For seeing the laws they make, are supposed to
be made by right, the members of the commonwealth, to whom they are
made, are obliged to obey them, and consequently not resist the
execution of them; which not-resistance, maketh the power absolute
of him that ordaineth them. It is likewise a mark of this
sovereignty, to have the right original of appointing magistrates,
judges, counsellors, and ministers of state. For without that power,
no act of sovereignty, or government, can be performed. Lastly, and
generally, whosoever by his own authority independent, can do any
act, which another of the same commonwealth may not, must needs be
understood to have the sovereign power. For by nature men have equal
right. This inequality therefore must proceed from the power of the
commonwealth. He therefore that doth any act lawfully by his own
authority, which another may not, doth it by the power of the
commonwealth in himself, which is absolute sovereignty.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER II.

1. Democracy precedeth all other, &c. 2.. The sovereign people
    covenanteth not with the subjects. 3. The sovereign, &c. cannot,
    &c. do injury, &c. 4. The faults of the sovereign people, &c. 5.
    Democracy, &c. an aristocracy of orators. 6. Aristocracy how
    made. 7. The body of the _optimates_ not properly said to injure
    the subjects. 8. The election of the _optimates_, &c. 9. An
    elective king, &c. 10. A conditional king, &c. 11. The word
    people equivocal. 12. Obedience discharged by release, &c. 13.
    How such releases are to be understood. 14. Obedience discharged
    by exile: 15. By conquest: 16. By ignorance of the right of
    succession.


[Sidenote: Democracy precedeth all other, &c.]

1. Having spoken in general concerning instituted policy in the
former chapter, I come in this, to speak of the sorts thereof in
special, how every of them is instituted. The first in order of time
of these three sorts, is democracy; and it must be so of necessity,
because an aristocracy and a monarchy, require nomination of persons
agreed upon, which agreement in a great multitude of men, must
consist in the consent of the major part; and where the votes of the
major part involve the votes of the rest, there is actually a
democracy.

[Sidenote: The sovereign people covenanteth not with the subjects.]

2. In the making of a democracy, there passeth no covenant between
the sovereign, and any subject. For while the democracy is a making,
there is no sovereign with whom to contract. For it cannot be
imagined, that the multitude should contract with itself, or with
any one man, or number of men, parcel of itself, to make itself
sovereign; nor that a multitude, considered as one aggregate, can
give itself anything which before it had not. Seeing then that
sovereignty democratical is not conferred by the covenant of any
multitude, which supposeth union and sovereignty already made, it
resteth, that the same be conferred by the particular covenants of
every several man; that is to say, every man with every man, for and
in consideration of the benefit of his own peace and defence,
covenanteth to stand to and obey whatsoever the major part of their
whole number, or the major part of such a number of them, as shall
be pleased to assemble at a certain time and place, shall determine
and command. And this is that which giveth being to a democracy,
wherein the sovereign assembly was called of the Greeks, by the name
of _Demus_, that is, the people, from whence cometh democracy. So
that, where to the supreme and independent court, every man may come
that will, and give his vote, there the sovereign is called the
people.

[Sidenote: The sovereign, &c. cannot, &c. do injury, &c.]

3. Out of this that hath been said, may readily be drawn, that
whatsoever the people doth to any one particular member or subject
of the commonwealth, the same by him ought not to be styled injury.
For first, injury, by the definition, Part I. chap. III. sect. 2, is
breach of covenant; but covenants, as hath been said in the
precedent section, there passed none from the people to any private
man; and consequently it, to wit, the people, can do him no injury.
Secondly, how unjust soever the action be, that this sovereign
_demus_ shall do, is done by the will of every particular man
subject to him, who are therefore guilty of the same. If therefore
they style it _injury_, they but accuse themselves. And it is
against reason for the same man, both to do and complain; implying
this contradiction, that whereas he first ratified the people’s acts
in general, he now disalloweth the same of them in particular. It is
therefore said truly, _volenti non fit injuria_. Nevertheless
nothing doth hinder, but that divers actions done by the people, may
be unjust before God Almighty, as breaches of the laws of nature.

[Sidenote: The faults of the sovereign people, &c.]

4. And when it happeneth, that the people by plurality of voices,
decree or command anything contrary to the law of God or nature,
though the decree and command be the act of every man, not only
present in the assembly, but also absent from it; yet is not the
injustice of the decree, the injustice of every particular man, but
only of those men, by whose express suffrages, the decree or command
was passed. For a body politic, as it is a fictitious body, so are
the faculties and will thereof fictitious also. But to make a
particular man unjust, which consisteth of a body and soul natural,
there is required a natural and very will.

[Sidenote: Democracy, &c. an aristocracy of orators.]

5. In all democracies, though the right of sovereignty be in the
assembly, which is virtually the whole body; yet the use thereof is
always in one, or a few particular men. For in such great
assemblies, as those must be, whereinto every man may enter at his
pleasure, there is no means any ways to deliberate and give counsel
what to do, but by long and set orations, whereby to every man there
is more or less hope given, to incline and sway the assembly to
their own ends. In a multitude of speakers therefore, where always
either one is eminent alone, or a few being equal amongst
themselves, are eminent above the rest, that one or few must of
necessity sway the whole. Insomuch, that a democracy, in effect, is
no more than an aristocracy of orators, interrupted sometimes with
the temporary monarchy of one orator.

[Sidenote: Aristocracy how made.]

6. And seeing a democracy is by institution, the beginning both of
aristocracy and monarchy, we are to consider next, how aristocracy
is derived from it. When the particular members of the commonwealth
growing weary of attendance at public courts, as dwelling far off,
or being attentive to their private businesses, and withal,
displeased with the government of the people, assemble themselves to
make an aristocracy, there is no more required to the making thereof
but putting to the question one by one, the names of such men as it
shall consist of, and assenting to their election; and by plurality
of vote, to transfer that power, which before the people had, to the
number of men so named and chosen.

[Sidenote: The body of the _optimates_ not properly said to injure
           the subjects.]

7. And from this manner of erecting an aristocracy, it is manifest,
that the few, or _optimates_, have entered into no covenant with any
of the particular members of the commonwealth, whereof they are
sovereign; and consequently cannot do any thing to any private man,
that can be called _injury_ to him, howsoever their act be wicked
before Almighty God, according to that which hath been said before,
section 3. Further, it is impossible, that the people, as one body
politic, should covenant with the aristocracy or _optimates_, on
whom they intend to transfer their sovereignty. For no sooner is the
aristocracy erected, but the democracy is annihilated, and the
covenants made unto them void.

[Sidenote: The election of the _optimates_, &c.]

8. In all aristocracies, the admission of such, as are from time to
time to have vote in the sovereign assembly, dependeth on the will
and decree of the present _optimates_. For they being the sovereign,
have the nomination, by the eleventh section of the former chapter,
of all magistrates, ministers, and counsellors of state whatsoever,
and may therefore choose either to make them elective, or
hereditary, at their pleasure.

[Sidenote: An elective king, &c.]

9. Out of the same democracy, the institution of a political monarch
proceedeth in the same manner, as did the institution of the
aristocracy, to wit, by a decree of the sovereign people, to pass
the sovereignty to one man named and approved by plurality of
suffrage. And if this sovereignty be truly and indeed transferred,
the estate or commonwealth is an absolute monarchy, wherein the
monarch is at liberty, to dispose as well of the succession, as of
the possession, and not an elective kingdom. For suppose a decree be
made first in this manner, that such a one shall have the
sovereignty for his life, and that afterward they will choose a-new.
In this case, the power of the people is dissolved, or not; if
dissolved, then after the death of him that is chosen, there is no
man bound to stand to the decrees of them that shall, as private
men, run together to make a new election; and consequently, if there
be any man, who by the advantage of the reign of him that is dead,
hath strength enough to hold the multitude in peace and obedience,
he may lawfully, or rather is by the law of nature obliged so to do:
if this power of the people were not dissolved at the choosing of
their king for life, then is the people sovereign still, and the
king a minister thereof only, but so, as to put the whole
sovereignty in execution; a great minister, but no otherwise for his
time, than a dictator was in Rome. In this case, at the death of him
that was chosen, they that meet for a new election, have no new, but
their old authority for the same. For they were the sovereign all
the time, as appeareth by the acts of those elective kings, that
have procured from the people, that their children might succeed
them. For it is to be understood, when a man receiveth any thing
from the authority of the people, he receiveth it not from the
people his subjects, but from the people his sovereign. And further,
though in the election of a king for his life, the people grant him
the exercise of their sovereignty for that time; yet if they see
cause, they may recall the same before the time. As a prince that
conferreth an office for life, may nevertheless, upon suspicion of
abuse thereof, recall it at his pleasure; inasmuch as offices that
require labour and care, are understood to pass from him that giveth
them, as _onera_, _burthens_, to them that have them; the recalling
whereof are therefore not _injury_, but _favour_. Nevertheless, if
in making an elective king, with intention to reserve the
sovereignty, they reserve not a power at certain known and
determined times and places to assemble themselves, the reservation
of their sovereignty is of no effect, inasmuch as no man is bound to
stand to the decrees and determinations of those that assemble
themselves without the sovereign authority.

[Sidenote: A conditional king, &c.]

10. In the former section is showed, that elective kings that
exercise their sovereignty for a time, which determines with their
life, either are subjects, or not sovereigns; and that it is, when
the people in election of them, reserve unto themselves the right of
assembling at certain times and places limited and made known; or
else absolute sovereigns, to dispose of the succession at their
pleasure, and that is, when the people in their election have
declared no time nor place of their meeting, or have left it to the
power of the elected king, to assemble and dissolve them at such
times, as he himself shall think good. There is another kind of
limitation of time, to him that shall be elected to use the
sovereign power, which whether it hath been practised anywhere, or
not, I know not, but it may be imagined, and hath been objected
against the rigour of sovereign power; and it is this, that the
people transfer their sovereignty upon conditions. As for example,
for so long as he shall observe such and such laws, as they then
prescribe him. And here as before in elected kings, the question is
to be made, whether in the electing of such a sovereign, they
reserved to themselves a right of assembling at times and places
limited and known, or not; if not, then is the sovereignty of the
people dissolved, and they have neither power to judge of the breach
of the conditions given him, nor to command any forces for the
deposing of him, whom on that condition they had set up, but are in
the estate of war amongst themselves, as they were before they made
themselves a democracy: and consequently, if he that is elected by
the advantage of the possession he hath of the public means, be able
to compel them to unity and obedience, he hath not only the right of
nature to warrant him, but the law of nature to oblige him
thereunto. But if in electing him, they reserved to themselves a
right of assembling, and appointed certain times and places to that
purpose, then are they sovereign still, and may call their
conditional king to account at their pleasure, and deprive him of
his government, if they judge he deserve it, either by breach of the
condition set him, or otherwise. For the sovereign power can by no
covenant with a subject be bound to continue him in the charge he
undergoeth by their command, as a burden imposed not particularly
for his good, but for the good of the sovereign people.

[Sidenote: The word people equivocal]

11. The controversies that arise concerning the right of the people,
proceed from the equivocation of the word. For the word people hath
a double signification. In one sense it signifieth only a number of
men, distinguished by the place of their habitation; as the _people_
of England, or the _people_ of France, which is no more, but the
multitude of those particular persons that inhabit those regions,
without consideration of any contracts or covenants amongst them, by
which any one of them is obliged to the rest. In another sense, it
signifieth a person civil, that is to say, either one man, or one
council, in the will whereof, is included and involved the will of
every one in particular. As for example, in this latter sense, the
lower house of parliament is all the commons, as long as they sit
there with authority and right thereto; but after they be dissolved,
though they remain, they be no more the people, nor the commons, but
only the aggregate, or multitude of the particular men there
sitting, how well soever they agree, or concur, in opinions amongst
themselves; whereupon, they that do not distinguish between these
two significations, do usually attribute such rights to a dissolved
multitude, as belong only to the people virtually contained in the
body of the commonwealth or sovereignty. And when a great number of
their own authority flock together in any nation, they usually give
them the name of the whole nation. In which sense they say the
people rebelleth, or the people demandeth, when it is no more than a
dissolved multitude, of which though any one man may be said to
demand or have right to something, yet the heap, or multitude,
cannot be said to demand or have right to anything. For where every
man hath his right distinct, there is nothing left for the multitude
to have right unto: and when the particulars say, this is mine, this
is thine, and this is his, and have shared all amongst them, there
can be nothing whereof the multitude can say, this is mine; nor are
they one body, as behoveth them to be, that demand anything under
the name of mine, or his: and when they say ours, every man is
understood to pretend in several, and not the multitude. On the
other side, when the multitude is united into a body politic, and
thereby are a people in the other signification, and their wills
virtually in the sovereign, there the rights and demands of the
particulars do cease; and he or they that have the sovereign power,
doth for them all, demand, and vindicate under the name of his, that
which before they called in the plural, theirs.

[Sidenote: Obedience discharged by release, &c.]

12. We have seen how particular men enter into subjection, by
transferring their rights; it followeth to consider, how such
subjection may be discharged. And first, if he or they that have the
sovereign power, shall relinquish the same voluntarily, there is no
doubt, but every man is again at liberty to obey, or not. Likewise,
if he or they retaining the sovereignty over the rest, do
nevertheless exempt some one or more, from their subjection, every
man so exempted, is discharged. For he or they to whom any man is
obliged, hath the power to release him.

[Sidenote: How such releases are to be understood.]

13. And here it is to be understood, that when he or they that have
the sovereign power, give such exemption, or privilege, to a
subject, as is not separable from the sovereignty, and nevertheless
directly retaineth the sovereign power, not knowing the consequence
of the privilege they grant, the person or persons exempted or
privileged, are not thereby released. For in contradictory
significations of the will (_Human Nature_, chap. XIII. sect. 9),
that which is directly signified, is to be understood for the will,
before that which is drawn from it by consequence.

[Sidenote: Obedience discharged by exile.]

14. Also exile perpetual, is a release of subjection, forasmuch, as
being out of the protection of the sovereignty that expelled him, he
hath no means of subsisting but from himself. Now every man may
lawfully defend himself, that hath no other defence; else there had
been no necessity that any man should enter into voluntary
subjection, as they do in commonwealths.

[Sidenote: By conquest.]

15. Likewise a man is released of his subjection by conquest. For
when it cometh to pass, that the power of a commonwealth is
overthrown, and any particular man thereby lying under the sword of
his enemy, yieldeth himself captive, he is thereby bound to serve
him that taketh him, and consequently discharged of his obligation
to the former. For no man can serve two masters.

[Sidenote: By ignorance of the right of succession.]

16. Lastly, ignorance of the succession dischargeth obedience. For
no man can be understood to be obliged to obey he knoweth not whom.




                              CHAPTER III.

1, 2. Titles to dominion: master and servant, &c. 3. Chains and
    other, &c. Bonds, &c. Slave defined. 4. Servants have no
    property against their lord, &c. 5. The master hath right to
    alienate his servant. 6. The servant of the servant, &c. 7. How
    servitude is discharged. 8. The middle lord, &c. 9. The title of
    man, &c. over beasts.


[Sidenote: Titles to dominion; master and servant, &c.]

1. Having set forth in the two preceding chapters, the nature of a
commonwealth _institutive_ by the consent of many men together, I
come now to speak of dominion, or a body politic by acquisition,
which is commonly called a _patrimonial_ kingdom. But before I enter
thereinto, it is necessary to make known upon what title one man may
acquire right, that is to say, property or dominion, over the person
of another. For when one man hath dominion over another, there is a
little kingdom. And to be a king by acquisition, is nothing else,
but to have acquired a right or dominion over many.

2. Considering men therefore again in the state of nature, without
covenants or subjection one to another, as if they were but even now
all at once created male and female, there be three titles only, by
which one man may have right and dominion over another; whereof two
may take place presently, and those are, voluntary offer of
subjection, and yielding by compulsion: the third is to take place,
upon the supposition of children begotten amongst them. Concerning
the first of these three titles, it is handled before in the two
last chapters. For from thence cometh the right of sovereigns over
their subjects in a commonwealth institutive. Concerning the second
title, which is when a man submitteth to an assailant for fear of
death, thereby accrueth a right of dominion. For where every man, as
it happeneth in this case, hath right to all things, there needs no
more for the making of the said right effectual, but a covenant from
him that is overcome, not to resist him that overcometh. And thus
cometh the victor to have right of absolute dominion over the
conquered. By which there is presently constituted a little body
politic, which consisteth of two persons, the one sovereign, which
is called the _master_, or lord; the other subject, which is called
the _servant_. And when a man hath acquired right over a number of
servants so considerable, as they cannot by their neighbours be
securely invaded, this body politic is a kingdom despotical.

[Sidenote: Chains and other, &c. bonds, &c. slave defined.]

3. And it is to be understood, that when a servant taken in the
wars, is kept bound in natural bonds, as chains, and the like, or in
prison, there hath passed no covenant from the servant to his
master. For those natural bonds have no need of strengthening by the
verbal bonds of covenant, and they show that the servant is not
trusted. But covenant, (Part I. chapter II. section 9,) supposeth
trust. There remaineth therefore in the servant thus kept bound, or
in prison, a right of delivering himself, if he can, by what means
soever. This kind of servant is that which ordinarily and without
passion, is called a _slave_. The Romans had no such distinct name,
but comprehended all under the name of _servus_; whereof such as
they loved and durst trust, were suffered to go at liberty, and
admitted to places of office, both near to their persons, and in
their affairs abroad; the rest were kept chained, or otherwise
restrained with natural impediments to their resistance. And as it
was amongst the Romans, so it was amongst other nations, the former
sort having no other bond but a supposed covenant, without which the
master had no reason to trust them; the latter being without
covenant, and no otherwise tied to obedience, but by chains, or
other like forcible custody.

[Sidenote: Servants have no property against their lord, &c.]

4. A master therefore is to be supposed to have no less right over
those, whose bodies he leaveth at liberty, than over those he
keepeth in bonds and imprisonment, and hath absolute dominion over
both, and may say of his servant, that he is his, as he may of any
other thing. And whatsoever the servant had, and might call his, is
now the master’s; for he that disposeth of the person, disposeth of
all the person could dispose of: insomuch, as though there be _meum_
and _tuum_ amongst servants distinct from one another by the
dispensation, and for the benefit of their master; yet there is no
_meum_ and _tuum_ belonging to any of them against the master
himself, whom they are not to resist, but to obey all his commands
as law.

[Sidenote: The master hath right to alienate his servant.]

5. And seeing both the servant and all that is committed to him, is
the property of the master, and every man may dispose of his own,
and transfer the same at his pleasure, the master may therefore
alienate his dominion over them, or give the same by his last will
to whom he list.

[Sidenote: The servant of the servant, &c.]

6. And if it happen, that the master himself by captivity or
voluntary subjection, become servant to another, then is that other
master _paramount_; and those servants of him that becometh servant,
are no further obliged, than their master paramount shall think
good; forasmuch as he disposing of the master subordinate, disposeth
of all he hath, and consequently of his servants, so that the
restriction of absolute power in masters, proceedeth not from the
law of nature, but from the political law of him that is their
master supreme or sovereign.

[Sidenote: How servitude is discharged.]

7. Servants immediate to the supreme master, are discharged of their
servitude, or subjection, in the same manner that subjects are
released of their allegiance in a commonwealth institutive. As
first, by release. For he that captiveth, which is done by accepting
what the captive transferreth to him, setteth again at liberty, by
transferring back the same. And this kind of release is called
_manumission_. Secondly, by exile. For that is no more but
manumission given to a servant, not in the way of benefit, but
punishment. Thirdly, by a new captivity, where the servant having
done his endeavour to defend himself, hath thereby performed his
covenant to his former master, and for the safety of his life,
entering into new covenant with the conqueror, is bound to do his
best endeavour to keep that likewise. Fourthly, ignorance of who is
successor to his deceased master, dischargeth him of obedience: for
no covenant holdeth longer than a man knoweth to whom he is to
perform it. And lastly, that servant that is no longer trusted, but
committed to his chains and custody, is thereby discharged of the
obligation _in foro interno_, and therefore if he can get loose, may
lawfully go his way.

[Sidenote: The middle lord, &c.]

8. But servants subordinate, though manumitted by their immediate
lord, are not thereby discharged of their subjection to their lord
paramount. For the immediate master hath no property in them, having
transferred his right before to another, namely, to his own and
supreme master. Nor if the chief lord should manumit his immediate
servant, doth he thereby release his servants of their obligation to
him that is so manumitted. For by this manumission, he recovereth
again the absolute dominion he had over them before. For after a
release, which is the discharge of a covenant, the right standeth as
it did before the covenant was made.

[Sidenote: The title of man, &c. over beasts.]

9. This right of conquest, as it maketh one man master over another,
so also maketh it a man to be master of the irrational creatures.
For if a man in the state of nature be in hostility with men, and
thereby have lawful title to subdue or kill, according as his own
conscience and discretion shall suggest unto him for his safety and
benefit, much more may he do the same to beasts; that is to say,
save and preserve for his own service, according to his discretion,
such as are of nature apt to obey, and commodious for use; and to
kill and destroy, with perpetual war, all other, as fierce, and
noisome to him. And this dominion is therefore of the law of nature,
and not of the divine law positive. For if there had been no such
right before the revealing of God’s will in the Scripture, then
should no man, to whom the Scripture hath not come, have right to
make use of those his creatures, either for his food or sustenance.
And it were a hard condition of mankind, that a fierce and savage
beast should with more right kill a man, than a man a beast.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER IV.

1. The dominion over the child, &c. 2. Pre-eminence of sex giveth
    not the child to the father, rather than to the mother. 3. The
    title of the father or mother, &c. 4. The child of a
    woman-servant, &c. 5. The right to the child given from the
    mother, &c. 6. The child of the concubine, &c. 7. The child of
    the husband and the wife, &c. 8. The father, or he or she that
    bringeth up the child, have absolute power over him. 9. Freedom
    in subjects what it is. 10. A great family is a patrimonial
    kingdom. 11. Succession of the sovereign power, &c. 12. Though
    the successor be not declared, yet there is always one to be
    presumed. 13. The children preferred to the succession, &c. 14.
    The males before the females. 15. The eldest before the rest of
    the brothers. 16. The brother next to the children. 17. The
    succession of the possessor, &c.


[Sidenote: The dominion over the child, &c.]

1. Of three ways by which a man becometh subject to another,
mentioned section 2, chapter the last, namely, voluntary offer,
captivity and birth, the former two have been spoken of, under the
name of subjects, and servants. In the next place, we are to set
down the third way of subjection, under the name of children, and by
what title one man cometh to have propriety in a child, that
proceedeth from the common generation of two; to wit, of male and
female. And considering men again dissolved from all covenants one
with another, and that (Part I. chap. IV. sect. 2) every man by the
law of nature, hath right or propriety to his own body, the child
ought rather to be the propriety of the mother, of whose body it is
part, till the time of separation, than of the father. For the
understanding therefore of the right that a man or woman hath to his
or their child, two things are to be considered; first, what title
the mother, or any other, originally hath, to a child new born:
secondly, how the father, or any other man, pretendeth by the
mother.

[Sidenote: Pre-eminence of sex giveth not the child to the father,
           rather than to the mother.]

2. For the first, they that have written of this subject, have made
generation to be a title of dominion over persons, as well as the
consent of the persons themselves. And because generation giveth
title to two, namely, father and mother, whereas dominion is
indivisible, they therefore ascribe dominion over the child to the
father only, _ob præstantiam sexûs_; but they show not, neither can
I find out by what coherence, either generation inferreth dominion,
or advantage of so much strength, which, for the most part, a man
hath more than a woman, should generally and universally entitle the
father to a propriety in the child, and take it away from the
mother.

[Sidenote: The title of the father or mother, &c.]

3. The title to dominion over a child, proceedeth not from the
generation, but from the preservation of it; and therefore in the
estate of nature, the mother, in whose power it is to save or
destroy it, hath right thereto by that power, according to that
which hath been said, Part I. chapter I. sect. 13. And if the mother
shall think fit to abandon, or expose her child to death, whatsoever
man or woman shall find the child so exposed, shall have the same
right which the mother had before; and for this same reason, namely,
for the power not of generating, but preserving. And though the
child thus preserved, do in time acquire strength, whereby he might
pretend equality with him or her that hath preserved him, yet shall
that pretence be thought unreasonable, both because his strength was
the gift of him, against whom he pretendeth, and also because it is
to be presumed, that he which giveth sustenance to another, whereby
to strengthen him, hath received a promise of obedience in
consideration thereof. For else it would be wisdom in men, rather to
let their children perish, while they are infants, than to live in
their danger or subjection, when they are grown.

[Sidenote: The child of a woman servant, &c.]

4. For the pretences which a man may have to dominion over a child
by the right of the mother, they be of divers kinds. One by the
absolute subjection of the mother; another, by some particular
covenant from her, which is less than a covenant of such subjection.
By absolute subjection, the master of the mother, hath right to her
child, according to section 6, chapter III, whether he be the father
thereof, or not. And thus the children of the servant are the goods
of the master _in perpetuum_.

[Sidenote: The right to the child given from the mother, &c.]

5. Of covenants that amount not to subjection between a man and
woman, there be some which are made for a time; they are covenants
of cohabitation, or else of copulation only. And in this latter
case, the children pass by covenants particular. And thus in the
copulation of the Amazons with their neighbours, the fathers by
covenant had the male children only, the mothers retaining the
females.

[Sidenote: The child of the concubine, &c.]

6. And covenants of cohabitation are either for society of bed, or
for society of all things; if for society of bed only, then is the
woman called _a concubine_. And here also the child shall be his or
hers, as they shall agree particularly by covenant. For although for
the most part, a concubine is supposed to yield up the right of her
children to the father, yet doth not concubinate enforce so much.

[Sidenote: The child of the husband and the wife, &c.]

7. But if the covenants of cohabitation be for society of all
things, it is necessary that but one of them govern and dispose of
all that is common to them both; without which, as hath been often
said before, society cannot last. And therefore the man, to whom for
the most part the woman yieldeth the government, hath for the most
part, also, the sole right and dominion over the children. And the
man is called the husband, and the woman the wife. But because
sometimes the government may belong to the wife only, sometimes also
the dominion over the children shall be in her only. As in the case
of a sovereign queen, there is no reason that her marriage should
take from her the dominion over her children.

[Sidenote: The father, or he or she that bringeth up the child, have
           absolute power over him.]

8. Children therefore, whether they be brought up and preserved by
the father, or by the mother, or by whomsoever, are in most absolute
subjection to him or her, that so bringeth them up, or preserveth
them. And they may alienate them, that is, assign his or her
dominion, by selling, or giving them, in adoption or servitude to
others; or may pawn them for hostages, kill them for rebellion, or
sacrifice them for peace, by the law of nature, when he or she, in
his or her conscience, think it to be necessary.

[Sidenote: Freedom in subjects what it is.]

9. The subjection of them who institute a commonwealth amongst
themselves, is no less absolute, than the subjection of servants.
And therein they are in equal estate. But the hope of those is
greater than the hope of these. For he that subjecteth himself
uncompelled, thinketh there is reason he should be better used, than
he that doth it upon compulsion; and coming in freely, calleth
himself, though in subjection, a _freeman_; whereby it appeareth,
that liberty is not any exemption from subjection and obedience to
the sovereign power, but a state of better hope than theirs, that
have been subjected by force and conquest. And this was the reason,
that the name which signifieth children in the Latin tongue, is
_liberi_, which also signifieth _freemen_. And yet in Rome, nothing
at that time was so obnoxious to the power of others, as children in
the family of their fathers. For both the state had power over their
life without consent of their fathers, and the father might kill his
son by his own authority, without any warrant from the state.
Freedom therefore in commonwealths is nothing but the honour of
equality of favour with other subjects, and servitude the estate of
the rest. A freeman therefore may expect employments of honour,
rather than a servant. And this is all that can be understood by the
liberty of the subject. For in all other senses, liberty is the
state of him that is not subject.

[Sidenote: A great family is a patrimonial kingdom.]

10. Now when a father that hath children, hath servants also, the
children, not by the right of the child, but by the natural
indulgence of the parents, are such freemen. And the whole,
consisting of the father or mother, or both, and of the children,
and of the servants, is called a _family_, wherein the father or
mother of the family is sovereign of the same, and the rest, both
children and servants equally, subjects. The same family, if it grow
by multiplication of children, either by generation, or adoption; or
of servants, either by generation, conquest, or voluntary
submission, to be so great and numerous, as in probability it may
protect itself, then is that family called a _patrimonial kingdom_,
or monarchy by acquisition, wherein the sovereignty is in one man,
as it is in a monarch made by _political institution_. So that
whatsoever rights be in the one, the same also be in the other. And
therefore I shall no more speak of them as distinct, but of monarchy
in general.

[Sidenote: Succession of the sovereign power, &c.]

11. Having showed by what right the several sorts of commonwealths,
democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy, are erected, it followeth, to
show by what right they are continued. The right by which they are
continued, is called the right of succession to the sovereign power;
whereof there is nothing to be said in a democracy, because the
sovereign dieth not, as long as there be subjects alive: nor in an
aristocracy, because it cannot easily fall out, that the _optimates_
should every one fail at once; and if it should so fall out, there
is no question, but the commonwealth is thereby dissolved. It is
therefore in a monarchy only, that there can happen a question
concerning the succession. And first, forasmuch as a monarch, which
is absolute sovereign, hath the dominion in his own right, he may
dispose thereof at his own will. If therefore by his last will, he
shall name his successor, the right passeth by that will.

[Sidenote: Though the successor be not declared, yet there is always
           one to be presumed.]

12. Nor if the monarch die without any will concerning the
succession declared, it is not therefore to be presumed, it was his
will, his subjects, which are to him as his children and servants,
should return again to the state of anarchy, that is, to war and
hostility. For that were expressly against the law of nature, which
commandeth to procure peace, and to maintain the same. It is
therefore to be conjectured with reason, that it was his intention
to bequeath them peace, that is to say, a power coercive, whereby to
keep them from sedition amongst themselves; and rather in the form
of a monarchy, than any other government; forasmuch as he, by the
exercise thereof in his own person, hath declared, that he approveth
the same.

[Sidenote: The children preferred to the succession, &c.]

13. Further, it is to be supposed, his intention was, that his own
children should be preferred in the succession, when nothing to the
contrary is expressly declared, before any other. For men naturally
seek their own honour, and that consisteth in the honour of their
children after them.

[Sidenote: The males before the females.]

14. Again, seeing every monarch is supposed to desire to continue
the government in his successors, as long as he may; and that
generally men are endued with greater parts of wisdom and courage,
by which all monarchies are kept from dissolution, than women are;
it is to be presumed, where no express will is extant to the
contrary, he preferreth his male children before the female. Not but
that women may govern, and have in divers ages and places governed
wisely, but are not so apt thereto in general, as men.

[Sidenote: The eldest before the rest of the brothers.]

15. Because the sovereign power is indivisible, it cannot be
supposed, that he intended the same should be divided, but that it
should descend entirely upon one of them, which is to be presumed,
should be the eldest, assigned thereto by the lot of nature, because
he appointed no other lot for the decision thereof. Besides, what
difference of ability soever there may be amongst the brethren, the
odds shall be adjudged to the elder, because no subject hath
authority otherwise to judge thereof.

[Sidenote: The brother next to the children.]

16. And for want of issue in the possessor, the brother shall be
presumed successor. For by the judgment of nature, next in blood is
next in love; and next in love is next to preferment.

[Sidenote: The succession of the possessor, &c.]

17. And as the succession followeth the first monarch, so also it
followeth him or her that is in possession; and consequently, the
children of him in possession, shall be preferred before the
children of his father, or predecessor.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER V.

1. The utility of the commonwealth, &c. 2. The loss of liberty, &c.
    3. Monarchy approved by, &c. 4. Monarchy less subject to
    passion, &c. 5, 6. Subjects in monarchy, &c. 7. Laws in monarchy
    less changeable, &c. 8. Monarchies less subject to dissolution.


[Sidenote: The utility of the commonwealth, &c.]

1. Having set forth the nature of a Body Politic, and the three
sorts thereof, democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy; in this chapter
shall be declared, the _conveniences_, and _inconveniences_, that
arise from the same, both in general, and of the said several sorts
in particular. And first, seeing a body politic is erected only for
the ruling and governing of particular men, the benefit and damage
thereof, consisteth in the benefit or damage of being ruled. The
benefit is that for which a body politic was instituted, namely, the
peace and preservation of every particular man, than which it is not
possible there can be a greater, as hath been touched before, Part
I. chapter I. section 12. And this benefit extendeth equally both to
the _sovereign_, and to the _subjects_. For he or they that have the
sovereign power, have but the defence of their persons, by the
assistance of the particulars; and every particular man hath his
defence by their union in the sovereign. As for other benefits,
which pertain not to their safety and sufficiency, but to their well
and delightful being, such as are superfluous riches, they so belong
to the sovereign, as they must also be in the subject; and so to the
subject, as they must also be in the sovereign. For the riches and
treasure of the sovereign, is the dominion he hath over the riches
of his subjects. If therefore the sovereign provide not so as that
particular men may have means, both to preserve themselves, and also
to preserve the public; the common or sovereign treasure can be
none. And on the other side, if it were not for a common and public
treasure belonging to the sovereign power, men’s private riches
would sooner serve to put them into confusion and war, than to
secure and maintain them. Insomuch, as the profit of the sovereign
and subject goeth always together. That distinction therefore of
government, that there is one government for the good of him that
governeth, and another for the good of them that be governed;
whereof the former is _despotical_, that is lordly; the other, a
government of _freemen_, is not right. No more is the opinion of
them that hold it to be no city, which consisteth of a master and
his servants. They might as well say, it were no city, that
consisted in a father and his own issue, how numerous soever they
were. For to a master that hath no children, the servants have in
them all those respects, for which men love their children. For they
are his strength and his honour. And his power is no greater over
them, than over his children.

[Sidenote: The loss of liberty, &c.]

2. The inconvenience arising from government in general to him that
governeth, consisteth partly in the continual care and trouble about
the business of other men, that are his subjects; and partly, in the
danger of his person. For the head always is that part, not only
where the care resideth, but also against which the stroke of an
enemy most commonly is directed. To balance this incommodity, the
sovereignty, together with the necessity of this care and danger,
comprehendeth so much honour, riches, and means, whereby to delight
the mind, as no private man’s wealth can attain unto. The
inconveniences of government in general to a subject are none at
all, if well considered, but in appearance. There be two things that
may trouble his mind, or two general grievances; the one is, loss of
liberty; the other, the uncertainty of _meum_ and _tuum_. For the
first, it consisteth in this, that a subject may no more govern his
own actions according to his own discretion and judgment, or, which
is all one, conscience, as the present occasions from time to time
shall dictate to him; but must be tied to do according to that will
only, which once for all he had long ago laid up, and involved in
the wills of the major part of an assembly, or in the will of some
one man. But this is really no inconvenience. For, as it hath been
showed before, it is the only means, by which we have any
possibility of preserving ourselves. For if every man were allowed
this liberty of following his conscience, in such difference of
consciences, they would not live together in peace an hour. But it
appeareth a great inconvenience to every man in particular, to be
debarred of this liberty, because every one apart considereth it as
in himself, and not as in the rest; by which means, liberty
appeareth in the likeness of rule and government over others. For
where one man is at liberty, and the rest bound, there that one hath
government; which honour, he that understandeth not so much,
demanding by the name simply of liberty, thinketh it a great
grievance and injury to be denied it. For the second grievance
concerning _meum_ and _tuum_, it is also none, but in appearance
only; it consisteth in this, that the sovereign power taketh from
him that which he used to enjoy, knowing no other propriety, but use
and custom. But without such sovereign power, the right of men is
not propriety to anything, but a community, no better than to have
no right at all, as hath been showed, Part I. chapter I. section 10.
Propriety therefore being derived from the sovereign power, is not
to be pretended against the same, especially, when by it every
subject hath his propriety against every other subject, which when
sovereignty ceaseth, he hath not, because in that case they return
to war amongst themselves. Those levies therefore which are made
upon men’s estates, by the sovereign authority, are no more but the
price of that peace and defence which the sovereignty maintaineth
for them. If this were not so, no money nor forces for the wars, nor
any other public occasion, could justly be levied in the world. For
neither king, nor democracy, nor aristocracy, nor the estates of any
land, could do it, if the sovereignty could not. For in all those
cases, it is levied by virtue of the sovereignty. Nay more, by the
three estates here, the land of one man may be transferred to
another, without crime of him from whom it was taken, and without
pretence of public benefit, as hath been done; and this without
injury, because done by the sovereign power. For the power whereby
it is done, is no less than sovereign, and cannot be greater.
Therefore this grievance for _meum_ and _tuum_ is not real, unless
more be exacted than is necessary; but it seemeth a grievance,
because to them that either know not the right of sovereignty, or to
whom that right belongeth, it seemeth an injury; and injury, how
little soever the damage, is always grievous, as putting us in mind
of our disability to help ourselves, and into envy of the power to
do us wrong.

[Sidenote: Monarchy approved by, &c.]

3. Having spoken of the inconveniences of the subject, by government
in general, let us consider the same in the three several sorts
thereof, namely, _democracy_, _aristocracy_ and _monarchy_; whereof
the two former are in effect but one. For, as I have showed before,
democracy is but the government of a few orators. The comparison
therefore will be between monarchy and aristocracy: and to omit that
the world, as it was created, so also it is governed by one God
Almighty; and that all the ancients have preferred monarchy before
other governments, both in opinion, because they feigned a
monarchical government amongst their gods, and also by their custom;
for that in the most ancient times all people were so governed: and
that paternal government, which is monarchy, was instituted in the
beginning from the creation; and that other governments have
proceeded from the dissolution thereof, caused by the rebellious
nature of mankind, and be but pieces of broken monarchies cemented
by human wit, I will insist only on this comparison, upon the
inconveniences that may happen to the subjects in consequence to
each of these governments.

[Sidenote: Monarchy less subject to passion, &c.]

4. And first, it seemeth inconvenient there should be committed so
great a power to one man, as that it might be lawful to no other man
or men to resist the same; and some think it inconvenient _eo
nomine_, because he hath the power. But this reason we may not by
any means admit, for it maketh it inconvenient to be ruled by
Almighty God, who without question hath more power over every man,
than can be conferred upon any monarch. This inconvenience therefore
must be derived not from the power, but from the affections and
passions which reign in every one, as well monarch as subject, by
which the monarch may be swayed to use that power amiss: and because
an aristocracy consisteth of men, if the passions of many men be
more violent when they are assembled together, than the passions of
one man alone, it will follow, that the inconvenience arising from
passions will be greater in an _aristocracy_, than a _monarchy_. But
there is no doubt, when things are debated in great assemblies, but
every man delivering his opinion at large without interruption,
endeavoureth to make whatsoever he is to set forth for good, better;
and what he would have apprehended as evil, worse, as much as is
possible, to the end his counsel may take place; which counsel also
is never without aim at his own benefit, or honour; every man’s end
being some good to himself. Now this cannot be done without working
on the passions of the rest. And thus the passions of these that are
singly moderate, are altogether vehement; even as a great many
coals, though but warm asunder, being put together, inflame one
another.

[Sidenote: Subjects in monarchy, &c.]

5. Another inconvenience of monarchy, is this, that the monarch,
besides the riches necessary for the defence of the commonwealth,
may take so much more from the subjects, as may enrich his children,
kindred and favourites, to what degree he pleaseth; which though it
be indeed an inconvenience, if he should so do, yet is the same both
greater in an aristocracy, and also more likely to come to pass, for
there not one only, but many have children, kindred, and friends to
raise. And in that point they are as twenty monarchs for one, and
likely to set forward one another’s designs mutually, to the
oppression of all the rest. The same also happeneth in a democracy,
if they all do agree; otherwise they bring a worse inconvenience; to
wit, sedition.

6. Another inconvenience of monarchy, is the power of dispensing
with the execution of justice, whereby the family and friends of the
monarch, may, with impunity, commit outrages upon the people, or
oppress them with extortion. But in aristocracies, not only one, but
many have power of taking men out of the hands of justice, and no
man is willing his kindred or friends should be punished according
to their demerits. And therefore they understand amongst themselves
without further speaking, as a tacit covenant, _hodie mihi, cras
tibi_.

[Sidenote: Laws in monarchy less changeable, &c.]

7. Another inconvenience of monarchy, is the power of altering laws.
Concerning which, it is necessary that such a power be, that laws
may be altered, according as men’s manners change, or as the
conjuncture of all circumstances within and without the commonwealth
shall require; the change of law being then inconvenient, when it
proceedeth from the change, not of the occasion, but of the minds of
him or them, by whose authority the laws are made. Now it is
manifest enough of itself, that the mind of one man is not so
variable in that point, as are the decrees of an assembly. For not
only they have all their natural changes, but the change of any one
man may be enough, with eloquence and reputation, or by solicitation
and faction, to make that law to-day, which another by the very same
means, shall abrogate to-morrow.

[Sidenote: Monarchies less subject to dissolution.]

8. Lastly, the greatest inconvenience that can happen to a
commonwealth, is the aptitude to dissolve into civil war; and to
this are monarchies much less subject, than any other governments.
For where the union, or band of a commonwealth, is one man, there is
no distraction; whereas in assemblies, those that are of different
opinions, and give different counsel, are apt to fall out amongst
themselves, and to cross the designs of the commonwealth for one
another’s sake: and when they cannot have the honour of making good
their own devices, they yet seek the honour to make the counsels of
their adversaries prove vain. And in this contention, when the
opposite factions happen to be anything equal in strength, they
presently fall to war. Wherein necessity teacheth both sides, that
an absolute monarch, to wit, a general, is necessary both for their
defence against one another, and also for the peace of each faction
within itself. But this aptitude to dissolution, is to be understood
for an inconvenience in such aristocracies only where the affairs of
state are debated in great and numerous assemblies, as they were
anciently in Athens, and in Rome; and not in such as do nothing else
in great assemblies, but choose magistrates and counsellors, and
commit the handling of state affairs to a few; such as is the
aristocracy of Venice at this day. For these are no more apt to
dissolve from this occasion, than monarchies, the counsel of state
being both in the one and the other alike.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER VI.

1. A difficulty concerning absolute subjection to man, arising
    from our absolute subjection to God Almighty, propounded. 2.
    That this difficulty is only amongst those Christians that
    deny the interpretation of the Scripture to depend upon the
    sovereign authority of the commonwealth. 3. That human laws
    are not made to govern the consciences of men, but their words
    and actions. 4. Places of Scripture to prove obedience due
    from Christians to their sovereign in all things. 5. A
    distinction propounded between a fundamental point of faith,
    and a superstruction. 6. An explication of the points of
    faith, that be fundamental. 7. That the belief of those
    fundamental points, is all that is required to salvation, as
    of faith. 8. That other points not fundamental, are not
    necessary to salvation as matter of faith; and that no more is
    required by way of faith to the salvation of one man, than to
    the salvation of another. 9. That superstructions are not
    points of the faith necessary to a Christian. 10. How faith
    and justice concur to salvation. 11. That in Christian
    commonwealths, obedience to God and man stand well together.
    12. This tenet, whatsoever is against the conscience, is sin,
    interpreted. 13. That all men do confess the necessity of
    submitting of controversies to some human authority. 14. That
    Christians under an infidel are discharged of the injustice of
    disobeying him, in that which concerneth the faith necessary
    to salvation, by not resisting.


[Sidenote: A difficulty concerning absolute subjection to man,
           arising from our absolute subjection to God Almighty,
           propounded.]

1. Having showed, that in all commonwealths whatsoever, the
necessity of peace and government requireth, that there be existent
some power, either in one man, or in one assembly of men, by the
name of the power sovereign, which it is not lawful for any member
of the same commonwealth to disobey; there occurreth now a
difficulty, which, if it be not removed, maketh it unlawful for a
man to put himself under the command of such absolute sovereignty as
is required thereto. And the difficulty is this; we have amongst us
the Word of God for the rule of our actions: now if we shall subject
ourselves to men also, obliging ourselves to do such actions as
shall be by them commanded, when the commands of God and man shall
differ, we are to obey God, rather than man; and consequently, the
covenant of general obedience to man is unlawful.

[Sidenote: That this difficulty is only amongst those Christians
           that deny the interpretation of Scripture to depend upon
           the sovereign authority of the commonwealth.]

2. This difficulty hath not been of very great antiquity in the
world. There was no such _dilemma_ amongst the Jews; for their civil
law, and divine law, was one and the same law of Moses; the
interpreters whereof were the priests, whose power was subordinate
to the power of the king; as was the power of Aaron, to the power of
Moses. Nor is it a controversy that was ever taken notice of amongst
the Grecians, Romans, or other Gentiles: for amongst these their
several civil laws were the rules whereby not only righteousness and
virtue, but also religion, and the external worship of God, was
ordered and approved; that being esteemed the true worship of God,
which was κατὰ τὰ νόμιμα, according to the laws civil. Also those
Christians that dwell under the temporal dominion of the bishop of
Rome, are free from this question; for that they allow unto him,
their sovereign, to interpret the Scriptures, which are the law of
God, as he in his own judgment shall think right. This difficulty
therefore remaineth amongst, and troubleth those Christians only, to
whom it is allowed, to take for the sense of the Scripture, that
which they make thereof, either by their own private interpretation,
or by the interpretation of such as are not called thereunto by
public authority; they that follow their own interpretation
continually, demanding liberty of conscience; and those that follow
the interpretation of others not ordained thereunto by the sovereign
of the commonwealth, requiring a power in matters of religion either
above the power civil, or at least not depending on it.

[Sidenote: That human laws are not made to govern the consciences of
           men, but their words & actions.]

3. To take away this scruple of conscience, concerning obedience to
human laws, amongst those that interpret to themselves the word of
God in the Holy Scriptures, I propound to their consideration,
first, that no human law is intended to oblige the conscience of a
man, unless it break out into action, either of the tongue, or other
part of the body. The law made thereupon would be of none effect,
because no man is able to discern, but by word or other action
whether such law be kept or broken. Nor did the apostles themselves
pretend dominion over men’s consciences, concerning the faith they
preached, but only persuasion and instruction. And therefore St.
Paul saith (2 Cor. i. 24), writing to the Corinthians, concerning
their controversies, that he and the rest of the apostles had no
dominion over their faith, but were helpers of their joy.

[Sidenote: Places of Scripture to prove obedience due from
           Christians to their sovereign in all things.]

4. And for the actions of men which proceed from their consciences,
the regulating of which actions is the only means of peace, if they
might not stand with justice, it were impossible that justice
towards God, and peace amongst men, should stand together in that
religion that teacheth us, that _justice and peace shall kiss each
other_, and in which we have so many precepts of absolute obedience
to human authority; as Matth. xxiii. 2, 3, we have this precept:
_The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat; all therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do_. And yet were
the Scribes and Pharisees not priests, but men of temporal
authority. Again Luke xi. 17: _Every kingdom divided against itself
shall be desolate_; and is not that kingdom divided against itself,
where the actions of every one shall be ruled by his private
opinion, or conscience, and yet those actions such as give occasion
of offence and breach of peace? Again Rom. xiii. 5: _Wherefore you
must be subject, not because of wrath only, but also for conscience
sake_. Titus iii. 1: _Put them in remembrance, that they be subject
to principalities and powers_. 1 Peter ii. 13, 14: _Submit
yourselves unto all manner of ordinance of man, for the Lord’s sake,
whether it be unto the king, as unto the superior, or unto
governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of
evil doers_. Jude, verse 8: _These dreamers also that defile the
flesh, and despise government, and speak evil of them that are in
authority_. And forasmuch as all subjects in commonwealths are in
the nature of children and servants, that which is a command to
them, is a command to all subjects. But to these St. Paul saith
(Colos. iii. 20, 22): _Children, obey your parents in all things;
servants, be obedient to your masters according to the flesh in all
things_. And verse 23: _Do it heartily as to the Lord_. These places
considered, it seemeth strange to me, that any man in a Christian
commonwealth, should have any occasion to deny his obedience to
public authority, upon this ground, that _it is better to obey God
than man_. For though St. Peter and the apostles did so answer the
council of the Jews, that forbad them to preach Christ, there
appeareth no reason that Christians should allege the same against
their Christian governors, that command them to preach Christ. To
reconcile this seeming contradiction of simple obedience to God, and
simple obedience to man, we are to consider a Christian subject, as
under a Christian sovereign, or under an infidel.

[Sidenote: A distinction propounded between a fundamental point of
           faith and a superstruction.]

5. And under a Christian sovereign we are to consider, what actions
we are forbidden by God Almighty to obey them in, and what not. The
actions we are forbidden to obey them in, are such only, as imply a
denial of that faith which is necessary to our salvation: for
otherwise there can be no pretence of disobedience; for why should a
man incur the danger of a temporal death, by displeasing of his
superior, if it were not for fear of eternal death hereafter? It
must therefore be enquired, what those propositions and articles be,
the belief whereof our Saviour or his apostles have declared to be
such, as without believing them, a man cannot be saved; and then all
other points, that are now controverted, and made distinction of
sects, Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians, &c. (as in old
time, the like made Paulists, Apollonians, and Cephasians), must
needs be such, as a man needeth not for the holding thereof, deny
obedience to his superiors. And for the points of faith necessary to
salvation, I shall call them _fundamental_, and every other point a
_superstruction_.

[Sidenote: An explication of the points of faith, that be
           fundamental.]

6. And without all controversy, there is not any more necessary
point to be believed for man’s salvation than this, that _Jesus is
the Messiah_, that is, _the Christ_; which proposition is explicated
in sundry sorts, but still the same in effect; as, that _he is God’s
anointed_; for that is signified by the word Christ: that _he was
the true and lawful king of Israel, the son of David, the Saviour of
the world, the redeemer of Israel, the salvation of God, he that
should come into the world, the son of God_, and, which I desire by
the way to have noted, against the now sect of Arians, _the begotten
Son of God_, Acts iii. 13; Heb. v. 5: _The only begotten Son of
God_, John i. 14, 18; John iii. 16, 18; 1 John iv. 9: _That he was
God_, John i. 1; John xx. 28: _That the fulness of the Godhead dwelt
in him bodily_, Coloss. ii. 9: Moreover, _the Holy One, the Holy One
of God, the forgiver of sins, that he is risen from the dead_. These
are explications, and parts of that general article, that _Jesus is
the Christ_. This point therefore, and all the explications thereof
are fundamental: as also all such as be evidently inferred from
thence; as, BELIEF IN GOD THE FATHER: John xii. 44: _He that
believeth in me, believeth not in me, but in him that sent me_; 1
John ii. 23: _He that denieth the Son, hath not the Father_: BELIEF
IN GOD THE HOLY GHOST, of whom Christ saith, John xiv. 26: _But the
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
name_: and John xv. 26: _But when the Comforter shall come, whom I
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth_:
BELIEF OF THE SCRIPTURES, by which we believe those points and of
the immortality of the soul, without which we cannot believe he is a
Saviour.

[Sidenote: That the belief of those fundamental points, is all that
           is required to salvation, as of faith.]

7. And as these are the fundamental points of faith necessary to
salvation; so also are they only necessary as matter of faith, and
only essential to the calling of a Christian; as may appear by many
evident places of Holy Scripture: John v. 39: _Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me_. Now, forasmuch as by the _Scripture_, is
meant there the Old Testament (the New being then not written), the
belief of that which was written concerning our Saviour in the Old
Testament, was sufficient belief for the obtaining of eternal life:
but in the Old Testament, there is nothing revealed concerning
Christ, but that he is the Messiah, and such things as belong to the
fundamental points thereupon depending. And therefore those
_fundamental_ points are sufficient to salvation as of faith. And
John vi. 28, 29: _Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we
might work the works of God? Jesus answered and said unto them. This
is the work of God, that ye believe in him, whom he hath sent._ So
that the point to be believed is, _That Jesus Christ came forth from
God, and he which believeth it, worketh the works of God_. John xi.
26, 27: _Whosoever liveth and believeth in me, shall never die.
Believest thou this? She said unto him, Yea, Lord, I believe that
thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the
world._ Hence followeth, _He that believeth this, shall never die_.
John xx. 31: _But these things are written, that ye might believe,
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing, ye
might have life through his name_. By which appeareth, that this
_fundamental_ point is all that is required, as of faith to our
salvation. 1 John iv. 2: _Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God_: 1 John v. 1: _Whosoever
believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God_; and (verse 5)
_Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth, that
Jesus is the Son of God_: and verse 13: _These things have I written
unto you that believe in the name of the Son of God, that ye may
know that ye have eternal life_. Acts, viii. 36, 37: _The eunuch
said, Here is water, what doth hinder me to be baptized? And Philip
said unto him, If thou believest with all thy heart, thou mayest. He
answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God._
This point therefore was sufficient for the reception of man into
baptism, that is to say, to Christianity. And Acts, xvi. 29-31: _The
keeper of the prison fell down before Paul and Silas, and said,
Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? And they said, Believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ._ And the sermon of St. Peter, upon the day of
Pentecost, was nothing else but an explication, that _Jesus was the
Christ. And when they had heard him, they asked him, What shall we
do? He said unto them_, (Acts, ii. 38): _Amend your lives, and be
baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins_. Rom. x. 9: _If thou shalt confess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thy heart, that God raised him
up from the dead, thou shalt be saved_. To these places may be
added, that wheresoever our Saviour Christ doth approve the faith of
any man, the proposition believed, if the same be to be collected
out of the text, is always some of these fundamental points before
mentioned, or something equivalent: as the faith of the centurion
(Matth. viii. 8): _Speak the word only, and my servant shall be
healed_; believing he was omnipotent: the faith of the woman, which
had an issue of blood, (Matth. ix. 21): _If I may but touch the hem
of his garment_; implying, he was the Messiah: the faith required of
the blind men, (Matth. ix. 28): _Believe you that I am able to do
this?_ the faith of the Canaanitish woman, (Matth. xv. 22), that he
was the _Son of David_, implying the same. And so it is in every one
of those places, none excepted, where our Saviour commendeth any
man’s faith, which because they are too many to insert here, I omit,
and refer them to his inquisition that is not otherwise satisfied.
And as there is no other faith required, so there was no other
preaching: for the prophets of the Old Testament preached no other;
and John the Baptist preached only the approach of the kingdom of
heaven, that is to say, of the kingdom of Christ. The same was the
commission of the apostles (Matth. x. 7): _Go preach, saying, The
kingdom of heaven is at hand_. And Paul preaching amongst the Jews,
(Acts, xviii. 5), did but testify unto the Jews, that _Jesus was the
Christ_. And the heathens took notice of Christians no otherwise,
but by this name, that they believed _Jesus to be a king_, crying
out, (Acts, xvii. 6, 7): _These are they that have subverted the
state of the world, and here they are, whom Jason hath received. And
these all do against the decrees of Cæsar, saying, that there is
another king, one Jesus._ And this was the sum of the predictions,
the sum of the confessions of them that believed, as well men as
devils. This was the title of his cross, _Jesus of Nazareth, king of
the Jews_; this the occasion of the crown of thorns, sceptre of
reed, and a man to carry his cross; this was the subject of the
_Hosannas_; and this was the title, by which our Saviour, commanding
to take another man’s goods, bade them say, _The Lord hath need_;
and by this title he purged the temple of the profane market kept
there. Nor did the apostles themselves believe any more than that
_Jesus was the Messiah_, nor understand so much; for they understood
the Messiah to be no more than a temporal king, till after our
Saviour’s resurrection. Furthermore, this point, that _Christ is the
Messiah_, is particularly set forth for _fundamental_ by that word,
or some other equivalent thereunto in divers places. Upon the
confession of Peter (Matth. xvi. 16): _Thou art the Christ, the son
of the living God_, our Saviour (verse 18) saith, _Upon this rock
will I build my church_. This point therefore is the whole
foundation of Christ’s church. St. Paul saith, (Rom. xv. 20) _I so
enforced myself to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named,
lest I should have built upon another man’s foundation_. St. Paul,
(1 Cor. iii. 10) when he had reprehended the Corinthians for their
sects, and curious doctrines and questions, he distinguisheth
between _fundamental_ points, and _superstruction_; and saith, _I
have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereupon; but let
every man take heed how he buildeth upon it. For other foundation
can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ._
Coloss. ii. 6, 7: _As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so
walk in him, rooted and builded in him, and stablished in the
faith_.

[Sidenote: That other points not fundamental, are not necessary to
           salvation as matters of faith; and that no more is
           required by way of faith to the salvation of one man than
           to the salvation of another.]

8. Having showed this proposition, _Jesus is the Christ_, to be the
only fundamental and necessary point of faith, I shall set down a
few places more, to show, that other points, though they may be
true, are not so necessary to be believed, as that a man may not be
saved, though he believe them not. And first, if a man could not be
saved without assent of the heart to the truth of all controversies,
which are now in agitation concerning religion, I cannot see, how
any man living can be saved; so full of subtilty, and curious
knowledge it is to be so great a divine. Why therefore should a man
think that our Saviour, who (Matth. xi. 30), saith, that his _yoke
is easy_, should require a matter of that difficulty? or how are
little children said to believe, (Matth. xviii. 6); or how could the
good thief be thought sufficiently catechised upon the cross? or St.
Paul so perfect a Christian presently upon his conversion? and
though there may be more obedience required in him that hath the
fundamental points explicated unto him, than in him that hath
received the same but implicitly; yet there is no more faith
required for salvation in one man, than another. For if it be true,
that _Whosoever shall confess with his mouth the Lord Jesus, and
believe in his heart, that God raised him from the dead, shall be
saved_; as it is, Rom. x. 9, and that _Whosoever believeth that
Jesus is the Christ, is born of God_; the belief of that point is
sufficient for the salvation of any man whosoever he be, forasmuch
as concerneth faith. And seeing he that believeth not that _Jesus is
the Christ_, whatsoever he believe else, cannot be saved; it
followeth, that there is no more required of the salvation of one
man, than another, in matter of faith.

[Sidenote: That superstructions are not points of the faith
           necessary to a Christian.]

9. About these points fundamental, there is little controversy
amongst Christians, though otherwise of different sects amongst
themselves. And therefore the controversies of religion, are
altogether about points unnecessary to salvation; whereof some are
doctrines raised by human ratiocination, from the points
_fundamental_. As for example; such doctrines as concern the manner
of the real presence, wherein are mingled tenets of faith concerning
the omnipotency and divinity of Christ, with the tenets of Aristotle
and the Peripatetics concerning substance and accidents, species,
hypostasis, and the subsistence and migration of accidents from
place to place; words some of them without meaning, and nothing but
the canting of Grecian sophisters. And these doctrines are condemned
expressly, Col. ii. 8, where after St. Paul had exhorted them to _be
rooted and builded in Christ_, he giveth them this further caveat:
_Beware lest there be any man that spoil you through philosophy and
vain deceits, through the traditions of men, according to the
rudiments of the world_. And such are such doctrines, as are raised
out of such places of the Scriptures, as concern not the foundation,
by men’s natural reason; as about the concatenation of causes, and
the manner of God’s predestination; which are also mingled with
philosophy: as if it were possible for men that know not in what
manner God seeth, heareth, or speaketh, to know nevertheless the
manner how he intendeth, and predestinateth. A man therefore ought
not to examine by reason any point, or draw any consequence out of
Scripture by reason, concerning the nature of God Almighty, of which
reason is not capable. And therefore St. Paul, (Rom. xii. 3) giveth
a good rule, _That no man presume to understand above that which is
meet to understand, but that he understand according to sobriety_:
which they do not, who presume out of Scripture, by their own
interpretation, to raise any doctrine to the understanding,
concerning those things which are incomprehensible. And this whole
controversy concerning the predestination of God, and the free-will
of man, is not peculiar to Christian men. For we have huge volumes
of this subject, under the name of _fate_ and _contingency_,
disputed between the Epicureans and the Stoics, and consequently it
is not matter of faith, but of philosophy: and so are also all the
questions concerning any other point, but the foundation before
named; and God receiveth a man, which part of the question soever he
holdeth. It was a controversy in St. Paul’s time, whether a
Christian Gentile might eat freely of any thing which the Christian
Jews did not; and the Jew condemned the Gentile that he did eat, to
whom St. Paul saith, (Rom. xiv. 3): _Let not him that eateth not,
judge him that eateth; for God hath received him_. And verse 6, in
the question concerning the observing of holy days, wherein the
Gentiles and Jews differed, he saith unto them, _He that observeth
the day, observeth it to the Lord; and he that observeth not the
day, observeth it not to the Lord_. And they who strive concerning
such questions, and divide themselves into sects, are not therefore
to be accounted zealous of the faith, their strife being but carnal,
which is confirmed by St. Paul (1 Cor. iii. 4): _When one saith, I
am of Paul, and another, I am of Appollos, are ye not carnal?_ For
they are not questions of faith, but of wit, wherein, carnally, men
are inclined to seek the mastery one of another. For nothing is
truly a point of faith, but that _Jesus is the Christ_; as St. Paul
testifieth, (1 Cor. ii. 2): _For I esteemed not the knowledge of any
thing amongst you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified_. And 1 Tim.
vi. 20, 21: _O Timotheus, keep that which is committed unto thee,
and avoid profane and vain babblings, and opposition of science
falsely so called, which while some profess, they have erred
concerning the faith_. 2 Tim. ii. 16: _Shun profane and vain
babblings, &c._ Verse 17, 18: _Of which sort is Hymenæus and
Philetus, which as concerning the truth, have erred, saying, that
the resurrection is past already_. Whereby St. Paul showed, that the
raising of questions by human ratiocination, though it be from the
fundamental points themselves, is not only not necessary, but most
dangerous to the faith of a Christian. Out of all these places, I
draw only this conclusion in general, that neither the points now in
controversy amongst Christians of different sects, or in any point
that ever shall be in controversy, excepting only those that are
contained in this article, _Jesus is the Christ_, are necessary to
salvation, as of faith; though in matter of obedience, a man may be
bound not to oppose the same.

[Sidenote: How faith and justice concur to salvation.]

10. Although to the obtaining of salvation, there be required no
more, as hath been already declared, out of the Holy Scriptures, as
matter of faith, but the belief of those fundamental articles before
set forth; nevertheless, there are required other things, as matter
of obedience. For, as it is not enough in temporal kingdoms, to
avoid the punishment which kings may inflict, to acknowledge the
right and title of the king, without obedience also to his laws: so
also it is not enough, to acknowledge our Saviour Christ to be the
king of heaven, in which consisteth Christian faith, unless also we
endeavour to obey his laws, which are the laws of the kingdom of
heaven, in which consisteth Christian obedience. And forasmuch as
the laws of the kingdom of heaven, are the laws of nature, as hath
been showed, Part I. chapter V., not only faith, but also the
observation of the law of nature, (which is that for which a man is
called just or righteous, in that sense, in which justice is taken
not for the absence of guilt, but for the endeavour and constant
will to do that which is just) not only faith, but this justice,
which also from the effect thereof, is called repentance, and
sometimes works, is necessary to salvation. So that faith and
justice do both concur thereto; and in the several acceptation of
this word (justification) are properly said both of them to justify;
and the want of either of them is properly said to condemn. For not
only he that resisteth a king upon doubt of his title, but also he
that doth it upon the inordinateness of his passions, deserveth
punishment. And when faith and works are separated, not only the
faith is called dead without works, but also works are called dead
works without faith. And therefore St. James, (chapter ii. 17),
saith, _Even so the faith, if it have no works, is dead in itself_;
and verse 26: _For as the body without the spirit is dead, even so
faith without works is dead_. And St. Paul, (Heb. vi. 1), calleth
works without faith, _dead works_, where he saith, _Not laying again
the foundation of repentance from dead works_. And by these dead
works, is understood not the obedience and justice of the inward
man, but the _opus operatum_, or external action, proceeding from
fear of punishment, or from vain-glory, and desire to be honoured of
men: and these may be separated from faith, and conduce no way to a
man’s justification. And for that cause, St. Paul, (Rom. iv.)
excludeth the righteousness of the law, from having part in the
justification of a sinner. For by the law of Moses, which is applied
to men’s actions, and requireth the absence of guilt, all men living
are liable to damnation; and therefore no man is justified by works,
but by faith only. But if works be taken for the endeavour to do
them, that is, if the will be taken for the deed, or internal for
external righteousness, then do works contribute to salvation. And
then taketh place that of St. James, (chap. ii. 24): _Ye see then,
how that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only_. And
both of these are joined to salvation, as in St. Mark i. 15: _Repent
and believe the gospel_. And Luke xviii. 18-22, when a certain ruler
asked our Saviour, what he ought to do to inherit eternal life, he
propounded to him the keeping of the commandments; which when the
ruler said he had kept, he propounded to him the faith, _Sell all
that thou hast, and follow me_. And John iii. 36: _He that believeth
in the Son, hath everlasting life_. And _He that obeyeth not the
Son, shall not see life_. Where he manifestly joineth obedience and
faith together. And Rom. i. 17: _The just shall live by faith_; not
every one, but _the just_. For also _the devils believe and
tremble_. But though both faith and justice (meaning still by
justice, not absence of guilt, but the good intentions of the mind,
which is called righteousness by God, that taketh the will for the
deed) be both of them said to justify, yet are their parts in the
act of justification to be distinguished. For justice is said to
justify, not because it absolveth, but because it denominates him
just, and setteth him in an estate, or capacity of salvation,
whensoever he shall have faith. But faith is said to justify, that
is, to absolve, because by it a just man is absolved of, and
forgiven his unjust actions. And thus are reconciled the places of
St. Paul and St. James, that _Faith only justifieth_, and _a man is
not justified by faith only_; and showed how faith and repentance
must concur to salvation.

[Sidenote: That in Christian commonwealths, obedience to God and man
           stand well together.]

11. These things considered, it will easily appear, that under the
sovereign power of a Christian commonwealth, there is no danger of
damnation from simple obedience to human laws; for in that the
sovereign alloweth Christianity, no man is compelled to renounce
that faith, which is enough for his salvation, that is to say, the
fundamental points. And for other points, seeing they are not
necessary to salvation, if we conform our actions to the laws, we do
not only what we are allowed, but also what we are commanded by the
law of nature, which is the moral law taught by our Saviour himself.
And it is part of that obedience which must concur to our salvation.

[Sidenote: This tenet, whatsoever is against the conscience is sin,
           interpreted.]

12. And though it be true, whatsoever a man doth against his
conscience, is sin; yet the obedience in these cases, is neither
sin, nor against the conscience. For the conscience being nothing
else but a man’s settled judgment and opinion, when he hath once
transferred his right of judging to another, that which shall be
commanded, is no less his judgment, than the judgment of that other.
So that in obedience to laws, a man doth still according to his own
conscience, but not his private conscience. And whatsoever is done
contrary to private conscience, is then a sin, when the laws have
left him to his own liberty, and never else. And then whatsoever a
man doth, not only believing it is ill done, but doubting whether it
be ill or not, is done ill, in case he may lawfully omit the doing.

[Sidenote: That all men do confess the necessity of submitting of
           controversies to some human authority.]

13. And as it hath been proved, that a man must submit his opinions
in matter of controversy to the authority of the commonwealth; so
also is the same confessed by the practice of every one of them that
otherwise deny it. For who is there differing in opinion from
another, and thinking himself to be in the right, and the other in
the wrong, that would not think it reasonable, if he be of the same
opinion that the whole state alloweth, that the other should submit
his opinion also thereunto; or that would not be content, if not
that one or a few men, yet all the divines of a whole nation, or at
least an assembly of all those he liketh, should have the power to
determine all the controversies of religion? or, who is there that
would not be content, to submit his opinions, either to the pope, or
to a general council, or to a provincial council, or to a presbytery
of his own nation? And yet in all these cases he submitteth himself
to no greater than human authority. Nor can a man be said to submit
himself to Holy Scripture, that doth not submit himself to some or
other for the interpretation thereof. Or, why should there be any
church government at all instituted, if the Scripture itself could
do the office of a judge in controversies of faith? But the truth is
apparent, by continual experience, that men seek not only liberty of
conscience, but of their actions; nor that only, but a further
liberty of persuading others to their opinions; nor that only, for
every man desireth, that the sovereign authority should admit no
other opinions to be maintained, but such as he himself holdeth.

[Sidenote: That Christians under an infidel are discharged of the
           injustice of disobeying him, in that which concerneth the
           faith necessary to salvation, by not resisting.]

14. The difficulty therefore of obeying both God and man in a
Christian commonwealth is none: all the difficulty resteth in this
point, whether he that hath received the faith of Christ, having
before subjected himself to the authority of an infidel, be
discharged of his obedience thereby, or not, in matters of religion.
In which case it seemeth reasonable to think, that since all
covenants of obedience are entered into for the preservation of a
man’s life, if a man be content without resistance to lay down his
life, rather than obey the commands of an infidel, in so hard a case
he hath sufficiently discharged himself thereof. For no covenant
bindeth further than to endeavour; and if a man cannot assure
himself to perform a just duty, when thereby he is assured of
present death, much less can it be expected that a man should
perform that, for which he believeth in his heart he shall be damned
eternally. And thus much concerning the scruple of conscience, that
may arise concerning obedience to human laws, in them that interpret
the law of God to themselves. It remaineth, to remove the same
scruple from them, that submit their controversies to others not
ordained thereunto by the sovereign authority. And this I refer to
the chapter following.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER VII.

1. The question propounded, who are the magistrates in the kingdom
    of Christ. 2. The question exemplified, in the controversies
    between Moses and Aaron, and between Moses and Corah. 3. Amongst
    the Jews, the power temporal and spiritual in the same hand. 4.
    Parallel of the twelve princes of Israel, and the twelve
    apostles. 5. Parallel of seventy elders, and seventy disciples.
    6. The hierarchy of the church in our Saviour’s time, consisted
    in the twelve, and in the seventy. 7. Why Christ ordained no
    priests for sacrifices, as Moses did. 8. The hierarchy of the
    church in the apostles' time, apostles, bishops, and priests. 9.
    The preaching of the gospel was not commanding, but persuading.
    10. Excommunication. Sovereigns immediate rulers ecclesiastical
    under Christ. 11. That no man hath any just pretence of religion
    against obedience to commonwealth. God speaketh to man by his
    vicegerents.


[Sidenote: The question propounded, who are the magistrates in the
           kingdom of Christ.]

1. In the former chapter have been removed those difficulties
opposing our obedience to human authority, which arise from
misunderstanding of our Saviour’s title and laws: in the former
whereof, namely, his title, consisteth our faith; and in the latter,
our justice. Now they who differ not amongst themselves concerning
his title and laws, may nevertheless have different opinions
concerning his magistrates, and the authority he hath given them.
And this is the cause, why many Christians have denied obedience to
their princes, pretending that our Saviour Christ hath not given
this magistracy to them, but to others. As for example: some say, to
the pope universally; some, to a synod aristocratical; some, to a
synod democratical in every several commonwealth; and the
magistrates of Christ being they by whom he speaketh, the question
is, whether he speak unto us by the pope, or by convocations of
bishops and ministers, or by them that have the sovereign power in
every commonwealth.

[Sidenote: The question exemplified, in the controversies between
           Moses and Aaron, and between Moses and Corah.]

2. This controversy was the cause of those two mutinies, that
happened against Moses in the wilderness. The first by Aaron and his
sister Miriam, who took upon them to censure Moses, for marrying an
Ethiopian woman. And the state of the question between them and
Moses, they set forth (Numb. xii. 2) in these words: _What hath the
Lord spoken but only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us? And
the Lord heard this_, &c., and punished the same in Miriam,
forgiving Aaron upon his repentance. And this is the case of all
them that set up the priesthood against the sovereignty. The other
was of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, who with two hundred and fifty
captains gathered themselves together against Moses, and against
Aaron. The state of their controversy was this, whether God were not
with the multitude, as well as with Moses, and every man as holy as
he. For (Numb. xvi. 3) thus they say, _You take too much upon you,
seeing all the congregation is holy; every one of them, and the Lord
is amongst them: wherefore then lift ye yourselves above the
congregation of the Lord?_ And this is the case of them that set up
their private consciences, and unite themselves to take the
government of religion out of the hands of him or them, that have
the sovereign power of the commonwealth: which how well it pleaseth
God, may appear by the hideous punishment of Corah and his
accomplices.

[Sidenote: Amongst the Jews, the power temporal and spiritual in the
           same hand.]

3. In the government therefore of Moses there was no power, neither
civil, nor spiritual, that was not derived from him. Nor in the
state of Israel under kings, was there any earthly power, by which
those kings were compellable to any thing, or any subject allowed to
resist them in any case whatsoever. For though the prophets by
extraordinary calling, did often admonish and threaten them, yet
they had no authority over them. And therefore amongst the Jews, the
power spiritual and temporal, was always in the same hand.

[Sidenote: Parallel of the twelve princes of Israel, and the twelve
           apostles.]

4. Our Saviour Christ, as he was the rightful king of the Jews in
particular, as well as king of the kingdom of Heaven, in the
ordaining of magistrates, received that form of policy which was
used by Moses. According to the number of the children of Jacob,
Moses took unto him by the appointment of God (Numb. i. 4) twelve
men, every one of the chief of their tribe, which were to assist him
in the muster of Israel. And these twelve, verse 44, are called the
_princes of Israel, twelve men, every one for the house of their
fathers_; which are said also (Numb. vii. 2), _to be heads over the
houses of their fathers, and princes of the tribes, and over them
that were numbered_. And these were every one equal amongst
themselves. In like manner our Saviour took unto him twelve
apostles, to be next unto him in authority, of whom he saith (Matth.
xix. 28), _When the Son of Man shall sit in the throne of his
majesty, ye which follow me in the regeneration, shall sit also upon
twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel_. And
concerning the equality of the twelve apostles amongst themselves,
our Saviour saith (Matth. xx. 25), _Ye know that the Lords of the
Gentiles have domination over them, &c._ Verse 26: _But it shall not
be so amongst you; but whosoever will be greatest among you, let him
be your servant_. And Matth. xxiii. 11: _He that is greatest among
you, let him be your servant_. And a little before, verse 8, _Be not
called Rabbi; for one is your doctor, Christ, and all ye are
brethren_. And Acts i. in choosing of Matthias to be an apostle,
though St. Peter used the part of a _prolocutor_, yet did no man
take upon him the authority of election, but referred the same to
lot.

[Sidenote: Parallel of the seventy elders & seventy disciples.]

5. Again, Moses had the command of God, Numb. xi. 16: _Gather to me
seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest that they are
the elders of the people, and governors over them, and bring them
unto the tabernacle, &c._ And Moses, verse 24, did accordingly. And
these were chosen to help Moses in bearing the burthen of the
government, as appeareth, verse 17 of the same chapter. And as the
twelve princes of the tribes were according to the number of Jacob’s
children; so were the seventy elders according to the number of the
persons that went down with Jacob into Egypt. In like manner our
Saviour in his kingdom of Heaven, the church, out of the whole
number of those that believed in him, ordained seventy persons,
which peculiarly were called the seventy disciples, to whom he gave
power to preach the Gospel and baptize.

[Sidenote: The hierarchy of the church in our Saviour’s time,
           consisted in the twelve, and in the seventy.]

6. In our Saviour’s time therefore, the hierarchy of the church
consisted, besides himself that was the head, of twelve apostles,
who were equal amongst themselves, but ordained over others, as were
the twelve heads of the tribes, and seventy disciples, who had every
one of them power to baptize and teach, and help to govern the whole
flock.

[Sidenote: Why Christ ordained no priests for sacrifices, as Moses
           did.]

7. And whereas in the commonwealth instituted by Moses, there was
not only a high-priest for the present, but also a succession and
order of priests; it may be demanded, why our Saviour Christ did not
ordain the like? To which may be answered, that the high-priesthood,
forasmuch as concerneth the authority thereof, was in the person of
Christ, as he was Christ, that is king. So also was it in Moses,
Aaron having the ministerial part only. For notwithstanding that
Aaron was the high-priest, yet the consecration of him belonged
(Exod. xxix. 1) to Moses. All the utensils of sacrifice, and other
holy things, were ordered by Moses; and in sum, the whole Levitical
law was delivered by God by the hand of Moses, who was to Aaron a
God, and Aaron to him a mouth. And for the ministerial part, there
could no high-priest be ordained but himself; for seeing our Saviour
was himself the sacrifice, who but himself could offer him up? And
for the celebration of that sacrifice for ever after, our Saviour
annexed the priesthood to those whom he had appointed to govern in
the church.

[Sidenote: The hierarchy of the church, in the apostles' time,
           apostles, bishops, and priests.]

8. After the ascension of our Saviour, the apostles dispersed
themselves for the spreading of the Gospel, and continually as they
converted any number of men, in any city or region, to the faith,
they chose out such as they thought fittest, to direct them in
matter of conversation and life, according to Christ’s law, and to
explicate unto them, that mystery of Christ come in the flesh, that
is to say, to unfold unto them at large the office of the Messiah.
And of those elders, some were subordinate to others, according as
the apostles, who ordained them, thought meet. So St. Paul gave
power unto Titus, to ordain elders in Crete, and to redress things
that were amiss. So that Titus was both an elder, and ordained
elders (Tit. i. 5): _For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou
shouldest continue to redress the things that remain, and ordain
elders in every city_; where the word is καταστήσρς, that is
constitute; whereby it appeareth, that in the apostles' times, one
elder had authority over another, to ordain and rule them. For 1
Tim. v. 19, Timothy an elder, is made judge of accusations against
other elders. And Acts xiv. 23, the disciples are said to ordain
elders, for all the congregations of the cities they had preached
in. And though the word there be χειροτονήσαντες, yet it signifieth
not election by holding up of hands, but simply and absolutely
ordination. For the ordinary choosing of magistrates amongst the
Grecians, which were all either popularly governed, or else by
_oligarchy_, being performed by holding up of hands, made that word
be taken simply, for an election or ordination, howsoever made. And
thus in the primitive church, the hierarchy of the church, was
apostles, elders that governed other elders, and elders that ruled
not, but their office was to preach, to administer the sacraments,
to offer up prayers and thanksgiving in the name of the people. But
at that time there appeared no distinction between the names of
bishop and elder. But immediately after the apostles' time, the word
bishop was taken to signify such an elder as had the government of
elders, and other elders were called by the name of priests, which
signifieth the same that elder doth. And thus the government of
bishops hath a divine pattern in the twelve rulers, and seventy
elders of Israel, in the twelve apostles and seventy disciples of
our Saviour, in the ruling elders, and not ruling elders, in the
time of the apostles.

[Sidenote: The preaching of the gospel was not commanding, but
           persuading.]

9. And thus much of the magistrates over Christ’s flock in the
primitive church. For the office of a minister, or ministress, was
to be subject to the flock, and to serve them in those things which
appertain to their temporal business. The next thing to be
considered is the authority which our Saviour gave them, either over
those whom they had converted, or those whom they were about to
convert. And for these latter, which as yet were without the church,
the authority which our Saviour gave to his apostles was no more but
this, to preach unto them that Jesus was the Christ, and to
explicate the same in all points, that concern the kingdom of
heaven, and to persuade men to embrace our Saviour’s doctrine, but
by no means to compel any man to be subject to them: for seeing the
laws of the kingdom of heaven, as hath been showed, Part I, chap. V.
sect. 10, are dictated to the conscience only, which is not subject
to compulsion and constraint, it was not congruent to the style of
the King of Heaven to constrain men to submit their actions to him,
but to advise them only; nor for him that professeth the sum of his
law to be love, to extort any duty from us with fear of temporal
punishment. And therefore as the mighty men in the world, that hold
others in subjection by force, are called in Scripture by the name
of hunters; so our Saviour calleth those whom he appointed to draw
the world unto him, by subduing their affections, _fishers_. And
therefore he saith to Peter and Andrew, (Matth. iv. 19): _Follow me,
and I will make ye fishers of men_. And Luke x. 3: _Behold_, saith
Christ, _I send ye forth as lambs amongst wolves_. And it were to no
end to give them the right of compelling, without strengthening the
same with greater power than of _lambs_ amongst _wolves_. Moreover,
Matth. x, where our Saviour giveth a commission to his apostles, to
go forth and convert the nations to the faith, he giveth them no
authority of _coercion_ and punishment, but only saith, (verse 14,
15) _Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye
depart out of that house, or that city, shake off the dust of your
feet. It shall be easier for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the
day of judgment, than for that city._ Whereby it is manifest, that
all that the apostles could do by their authority, was no more than
to renounce communion with them, and leave their punishment to God
Almighty, in the day of judgment. Likewise the comparisons of the
kingdom of heaven to the seed, Matth. xiii. 3, and to the leaven,
Matth. xiii. 33, doth intimate unto us that the increase thereof
ought to proceed from internal operation of God’s word preached, and
not from any law or compulsion of them that preach it. Moreover our
Saviour himself saith (John xviii. 36), _That_ his _kingdom is not
of this world_; and consequently his magistrates derive not from him
any authority of punishing men in this world. And therefore also,
Matth. xxvi. 52, after St. Peter had drawn his sword in his defence,
our Saviour saith, _Put up thy sword into his place. For all that
take the sword, shall perish by the sword._ And, verse 54, _How then
shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, which say, that it must be so?_
showing out of the Scriptures, that the kingdom of Christ was not to
be defended by the sword.

[Sidenote: Excommunication. Sovereigns immediate rulers
           ecclesiastical under Christ.]

10. But concerning the authority of the apostles or bishops over
those who were already converted and within the church, there be
that think it greater than over them without. For some have said,
(Bellarmin. _Lib. de Rom. Pont._ cap. 29,) _Though the law of Christ
deprive no prince of his dominion, and Paul did rightly appeal unto
Cæsar, whilst kings were infidels and out of the church; yet when
they became Christians, and of their own accord underwent the laws
of the gospel, presently as sheep to a shepherd, and as members to
the head, they became subject to the prelate of the ecclesiastical
hierarchy_. Which, whether it be true or not, is to be considered by
that light which we have from the Holy Scripture, concerning the
power of our Saviour and his apostles, over such as they had
converted. But our Saviour, as he imitated the commonwealth of the
Jews in his magistrates, the twelve and the seventy; so did he also
in the censure of the church, which was _excommunication_; but
amongst the Jews, the church did put the excommunicated persons from
the congregation, which they might do by their power temporal; but
our Saviour and his apostles, who took upon them no such power,
could not forbid the excommunicated person to enter into any place
and congregation, into which he was permitted to enter, by the
prince, or sovereign of the place. For that had been to deprive the
sovereign of his authority. And therefore the excommunication of a
person subject to an earthly power, was but a declaration of the
church, which did excommunicate, that the person so excommunicated
was to be reputed still as an infidel, but not to be driven by their
authority, out of any company, he might otherwise lawfully come
into. And this is it our Saviour saith (Matth. xviii. 17): _If he
refuse to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man
and a publican_. So that the whole effect of excommunicating a
Christian prince, is no more than he or they that so excommunicate
him depart and banish themselves out of his dominion. Nor can they
thereupon discharge any of his subjects of their obedience to him;
for that were to deprive him of his dominion; which they may not do,
for being out of the church. It is confessed by them that make this
objection, and proved in the former section, that our Saviour gave
no authority to his apostles to be judges over them. And therefore
in no case can the sovereign power of a commonwealth be subject to
any authority ecclesiastical, besides that of Christ himself. And
though he be informed concerning the kingdom of heaven, and subject
himself thereto at the persuasions of persons ecclesiastical, yet is
he not thereby subject to their government and rule. For if it were
by their authority he took that yoke upon him, and not by their
persuasion, then by the same authority he might cast it off. But
this is unlawful. For if all the churches in the world should
renounce the Christian faith, yet is not this sufficient authority
for any of the members to do the same. It is manifest therefore,
that they who have sovereign power, are immediate rulers of the
church under Christ, and all other but subordinate to them. If that
were not, but kings should command one thing upon pain of death, and
priests another, upon pain of damnation, it would be impossible that
peace and religion should stand together.

[Sidenote: That no man hath any just pretence of religion against
           obedience to commonwealth. God speaketh to man by his
           vicegerents.]

11. And therefore there is no just cause for any man to withdraw his
obedience from the sovereign state, upon pretence that Christ hath
ordained any state ecclesiastical above it. And though kings take
not upon them the ministerial priesthood, yet are they not so merely
laic, as not to have sacerdotal jurisdiction. To conclude this
chapter, since God speaketh not in these days to any man by his
private interpretation of the Scriptures, nor by the interpretation
of any power above, or not depending on the sovereign power of every
commonwealth, it remaineth, that he speaketh by his vice-gods, or
lieutenants here on earth, that is to say, by sovereign kings, or
such as have sovereign authority as well as they.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER VIII.

1. The things that dispose to rebellion, discontent, pretence, and
    hope of success. 2. Discontent that disposeth to sedition,
    consisteth partly in fear of want, or punishment: 3. Partly in
    ambition. 4. Six heads of pretences to rebellion. 5. The first
    of them, that men ought to do nothing against conscience,
    confuted. 6. The second, that sovereigns are subject to their
    own laws, confuted. 7. The third, that the sovereignty is
    divisible, confuted. 8. The fourth, that subjects have a
    propriety distinct from the dominion of the sovereign, confuted.
    9. The fifth, that the people is a person distinct from the
    sovereign, confuted. 10. The sixth, that tyrannicide is lawful,
    confuted. 11. Four heads of hope of success in rebellion. 12.
    Two things necessary to an author of rebellion, much eloquence,
    and little wisdom. 13. That the authors of rebellion necessarily
    are to be men of little wisdom. 14. That the same are
    necessarily eloquent. 15. In what manner they concur to their
    common effects.


[Sidenote: The things that dispose to rebellion, discontent,
           pretence, and hope of success.]

1. Hitherto of the causes why, and the manner how, men have made
commonwealth. In this chapter I shall show briefly by what causes,
and in what manner, they be again destroyed; not meaning to say
anything concerning the dissolution of a commonwealth, from foreign
invasions, which is as it were the violent death thereof. I shall
speak only of sedition, which is also the death of the commonwealth,
but like to that which happeneth to a man from sickness and
distemper. To dispose men to sedition, three things concur. The
first is discontent; for as long as a man thinketh himself well, and
that the present government standeth not in his way to hinder his
proceeding from well to better, it is impossible for him to desire
the change thereof. The second is pretence of right; for though a
man be discontent, yet if in his own opinion there be no just cause
of stirring against, or resisting the government established, nor
any pretence to justify his resistance, and to procure aid, he will
never show it. The third is hope of success; for it were madness to
attempt without hope, when to fail, is to die the death of a
traitor. Without these three, discontent, pretence, and hope, there
can be no rebellion: and when the same are all together, there
wanteth nothing thereto, but a man of credit to set up the standard,
and to blow the trumpet.

[Sidenote: Discontent that disposeth to sedition, consisteth partly
           in fear of want, or punishment:]

2. And as for discontent, it is of two sorts: for it consisteth
either in bodily pain present or expected, or else in trouble of the
mind; which is the general division of pleasure and pain, _Human
Nature_, chap. VII. sect. 8. The presence of bodily pain disposeth
not to sedition; the fear of it doth. As for example; when a great
multitude, or heap of people, have concurred to a crime worthy of
death, they join together, and take arms to defend themselves for
fear thereof. So also the fear of want, or in present want, the fear
of arrests and imprisonment dispose to sedition. And therefore great
exactions, though the right thereof be acknowledged, have caused
great seditions. As in the time of Henry VII. the seditions of the
Cornish men, that refused to pay a subsidy, and, under the conduct
of the Lord Audley, gave the King battle upon Blackheath; and that
of the northern people, who in the same king’s time, for demanding a
subsidy granted in parliament, murdered the Earl of Northumberland
in his house.

[Sidenote: Partly in ambition.]

3. Thirdly, the other sort of discontent, which troubleth the mind
of them who otherwise live at ease, without fear of want, or danger
of violence, ariseth only from a sense of their want of that power,
and that honour and testimony thereof, which they think is due unto
them. For all joy and grief of mind consisting (as hath been said,
_Human Nature_, chap. IX. sect. 21) in a contention for precedence
to them with whom they compare themselves; such men must needs take
it ill, and be grieved with the state, as find themselves postposed
to those in honour, whom they think they excel in virtue and ability
to govern. And this is it for which they think themselves regarded
but as slaves. Now seeing freedom cannot stand together with
subjection, liberty in a commonwealth is nothing but government and
rule, which because it cannot be divided, men must expect in common;
and that can be no where but in the popular state, or democracy. And
Aristotle saith well, (lib. VI. cap. 2 of his _Politics_), _The
ground or intention of a democracy, is liberty_. Which he confirmeth
in these words: _For men ordinarily say this, that no man can
partake of liberty, but only in a popular commonwealth_. Whosoever
therefore in a monarchical estate, where the sovereign power is
absolutely in one man, claimeth liberty, claimeth (if the hardest
construction should be made thereof) either to have the sovereignty
in his turn, or to be colleague with him that hath it, or to have
the monarchy changed into a democracy. But if the same be construed,
with pardon of that unskilful expression, according to the intention
of him that claimeth, then doth he thereby claim no more but this,
that the sovereign should take notice of his ability and deserving,
and put him into employment and place of subordinate government,
rather than others that deserve less. And as one claimeth, so doth
another, every man esteeming his own desert greatest. Amongst all
those that pretend to, or are ambitious of such honour, a few only
can be served, unless it be in a _democracy_; the rest therefore
must be discontent. And so much of the first thing that disposeth to
rebellion, namely, discontent, consisting in fear and ambition.

[Sidenote: Six heads of pretences to rebellion.]

4. The second thing that disposeth to rebellion, is _pretence of
right_. And that is when men have an opinion, or pretend to have an
opinion, that in certain cases they may lawfully resist him or them
that have the sovereign power, or deprive him or them of the means
to execute the same. Of which pretences, there be six special cases.
One is, when the command is against their conscience, and they
believe it is unlawful for a subject at the command of the sovereign
power to do any action, which he thinketh in his own conscience not
lawful for him to do, or to omit any action, which he thinketh not
lawful for him to omit. Another is, when the command is against the
laws, and they think the sovereign power in such sort obliged to his
own laws, as the subject is; and that when he performeth not his
duty, they may resist his power. A third is, when they receive
commands from some man or men, and a _supersedeas_ to the same from
others, and think the authority is equal, as if the sovereign power
were divided. A fourth is, when they are commanded to contribute
their persons or money to the public service, and think they have a
propriety in the same distinct from the dominion of the sovereign
power; and that therefore they are not bound to contribute their
goods and persons, no more than every man shall of himself think
fit. A fifth, when the commands seem hurtful to the people; and they
think, every one of them, that the opinion and sense of the people,
is the same with the opinion of himself, and those that consent with
him; calling by the name of people, any multitude of his own
faction. The sixth is, when the commands are grievous; and they
account him that commandeth grievous things a tyrant; and
tyrannicide, that is, the killing of a tyrant, not only lawful, but
also laudable.

[Sidenote: The first of them, that men ought to do nothing against
           conscience, confuted.]

5. All these opinions are maintained in the books of the
_dogmatics_, and divers of them taught in public chairs, and
nevertheless are most incompatible with peace and government, and
contradictory to the necessary and demonstrable rules of the same.
And for the first, namely, that a man may lawfully do or omit any
thing against his conscience, and from whence arise all seditions
concerning religion and ecclesiastical government, it hath been
plainly declared in the two last chapters, that such opinion is
erroneous. For those two chapters have been wholly spent, to prove,
that Christian religion not only forbiddeth not, but also
commandeth, that in every commonwealth, every subject should in all
things to the uttermost of his power obey the commands of him or
them that is the sovereign thereof, and that a man in so obeying,
doth according to his conscience and judgment, as having deposited
his judgment in all controversies in the hands of the sovereign
power; and that this error proceedeth from the ignorance of what and
by whom God Almighty speaketh.

[Sidenote: The second, that sovereigns are subject to their own
           laws, confuted.]

6. As for the second opinion, which is this, that the sovereign is
in such sort obliged to his own laws, as the subject is; the
contrary thereof hath been showed, Part II. chapter I. sections
7-12, by which it appeareth, that the sovereign power is not to be
resisted; that it carrieth the sword both of war and justice; that
it hath the right of deciding all controversies, both judicial and
deliberative; that it hath the making of all the laws civil; that it
appointeth magistrates and public ministers, and that it implieth an
universal impunity. How then can he or they be said to be subject to
the laws which they may abrogate at their pleasure, or break without
fear of punishment? And this error seemeth to proceed from this,
that men ordinarily understand not aright, what is meant by this
word law, confounding law and covenant, as if they signify the same
thing. But law implieth a command; covenant is but a promise. And
not every command is a law, but only (_Human Nature_, chap. XIII.
sect. 6) when the command is the reason we have of doing the action
commanded. And then only is the reason of our actions in the
command, when the omitting is therefore hurtful, because the action
was commanded, not because it was hurtful of itself; and doing
contrary to a command, were not at all hurtful, if there were not a
right in him that commandeth to punish him that so doth. He or they
that have all punishments in their own disposing, cannot be so
commanded, as to receive hurt for disobeying, and consequently no
command can be a law unto them. It is an error therefore to think,
that the power which is virtually the whole power of the
commonwealth, and which in whomsoever it resideth, is usually called
supreme or sovereign, can be subject to any law but that of God
Almighty.

[Sidenote: The third, that the sovereignty is divisible, confuted.]

7. The third opinion, _that the sovereign power may be divided_, is
no less an error than the former, as hath been proved, Part II.
chapter I. sect. 15. And if there were a commonwealth, wherein the
rights of sovereignty were divided, we must confess with Bodin, Lib.
II. chap. I. _De Republica_, that they are not rightly to be called
commonwealths, but the corruption of commonwealths. For if one part
should have power to make the laws for all, they would by their laws
at their pleasure, forbid others, to make peace or war, to levy
taxes, or to yield fealty and homage without their leave; and they
that had the right to make peace and war, and command the _militia_,
would forbid the making of other laws, than what themselves liked.
And though monarchies stand long, wherein the right of sovereignty
hath seemed so divided, because monarchy of itself is a durable kind
of government, yet monarchs have been thereby divers times thrust
out of their possession. But the truth is, that the right of
sovereignty is such, as he or they that have it, cannot, though they
would, give away any part thereof, and retain the rest. As for
example; if we should suppose the people of Rome to have had the
absolute sovereignty of the Roman state, and to have chosen them a
council by the name of the senate, and that to this senate they had
given the supreme power of making laws, reserving nevertheless to
themselves, in direct and express terms, the whole right and title
of the sovereignty; which may easily happen amongst them that see
not the inseparable connexion between the sovereign power, and the
power of making laws: I say, this grant of the people to the senate
is of no effect, and the power of making laws is in the people
still. For the senate understanding it to be the will and intention
of the people, to retain the sovereignty, ought not to take that for
granted, which was contradictory thereto, and passed by error. For
(_Human Nature_, chap. XIII. sect. 9) in contradictory promises,
that which is directly promised, is preferred before that which is
opposite thereunto by consequence; because the consequence of a
thing is not always obscured, as is the thing itself. The error
concerning mixed government hath proceeded from want of
understanding of what is meant by this word _body politic_, and how
it signifieth not the concord, but the union of many men. And though
in the chapters of subordinate corporations, a corporation being
declared to be one person in law, yet the same hath not been taken
notice of in the body of a commonwealth or city, nor have any of
those innumerable writers of politics, observed any such union.

[Sidenote: The fourth, that subjects have a propriety distinct from
           the dominion of the sovereign, confuted.]

8. The fourth opinion, to wit, that subjects have their _meum_,
_tuum_, and _suum_, in property, not only by virtue of the sovereign
power over them all, distinct from one another, but also against the
sovereign himself, by which they would pretend to contribute nothing
to the public, but what they please, hath been already confuted, by
proving the absoluteness of the sovereignty, and more particularly,
Part II. chapter V. sect. 2; and ariseth from this, that they
understand not ordinarily that before the institution of sovereign
power, _meum_ and _tuum_, implied no propriety, but a community,
where every man had right to every thing, and was in state of war
with every man.

[Sidenote: The fifth, that the people is a person distinct from the
           sovereign, confuted.]

9. The fifth opinion, _That the people is a distinct body from him
or them that have the sovereignty over them_, is an error already
confuted, Part II. chap. II. sect 11, where it is showed, that when
men say, _the people rebelleth_, it is to be understood of those
particular persons only, and not of the whole nation. And when the
people claimeth any thing otherwise than by the voice of the
sovereign power, it is not the claim of the people, but only of
those particular men, that claim in their own persons; and this
error ariseth from the equivocation of the word _people_.

[Sidenote: The sixth, that tyrannicide is lawful, confuted.]

10. Lastly, for the opinion, _that tyrannicide is lawful_, meaning
by a tyrant any man in whom resideth the right of sovereignty, is no
less false and pernicious to human society, than frequent in the
writings of those moral philosophers, Seneca and others, so greatly
esteemed amongst us. For when a man hath the right of sovereignty,
he cannot justly be punished, as hath been often showed already, and
therefore much less deposed, or put to death. And howsoever he might
deserve punishment, yet punishment is unjust without judgment
preceding, and judgment unjust without power of judicature, which a
subject hath not over a sovereign. But this doctrine proceedeth from
the Schools of Greece, and from those that writ in the Roman state,
in which not only the name of a tyrant, but of a king, was hateful.

[Sidenote: Four heads of hope of success in rebellion.]

11. Besides _discontent_, to the disposing of a man to rebellion,
and pretence, there is required, in the third place, _hope of
success_, which consisteth in four points: I. That the discontented
have mutual intelligence; II. That they have sufficient number; III.
That they have arms; IV. That they agree upon a head. For these four
must concur to the making of one body of rebellion, in which
intelligence is the life, number the limbs, arms the strength, and a
head the unity, by which they are directed to one and the same
action.

[Sidenote: Two things necessary to an author of rebellion, much
           eloquence, and little wisdom.]

12. The authors of rebellion, that is, the men that breed these
dispositions to rebel in others, of necessity must have in them
these three qualities: I. To be discontented themselves; II. To be
men of mean judgment and capacity; and, III. To be eloquent men, or
good orators. And as for their discontent, from whence it may
proceed, hath been already declared. And for the second and third, I
am to show now, first, how they may stand together; for it seemeth a
contradiction, to place small judgment and great eloquence, or, as
they call it, powerful speaking, in the same man: and then in what
manner they concur, to dispose other men to sedition.

[Sidenote: That the authors of rebellion necessarily, are to be men
           of little wisdom.]

13. It was noted by Sallust, that in Catiline, who was author of the
greatest sedition that ever was in Rome, there was _Eloquentiæ
satis, sapientiæ parum_; _eloquence sufficient_, but _little
wisdom_. And perhaps this was said of Catiline, as he was Catiline:
but it was true of him as an author of sedition. For the conjunction
of these two qualities made him not Catiline, but seditious. And
that it may be understood, how want of _wisdom_, and store of
_eloquence_, may stand together, we are to consider, what it is we
call wisdom, and what eloquence. And therefore I shall here again
remember some things, that have been said already, _Human Nature_,
chap. V. VI. It is manifest that wisdom consisteth in knowledge. Now
of knowledge there are two kinds; whereof the one is the remembrance
of such things, as we have conceived by our senses, and of the order
in which they follow one another. And this _knowledge_ is called
_experience_; and the wisdom that proceedeth from it, is that
ability to conjecture by the present, of what is past, and to come,
which men call _prudence_. This being so, it is manifest presently,
that the author of sedition, whosoever he be, must not be prudent.
For if he consider and take his experiences aright, concerning the
success which they have had, who have been the movers and authors of
sedition, either in this or any other state, he shall find, that for
one man that hath thereby advanced himself to honour, twenty have
come to a reproachful end. The other kind of knowledge, is the
remembrance of the names or appellations of things, and how every
thing is called, which is, in matters of common conversation, a
remembrance of pacts and covenants of men made amongst themselves,
concerning how to be understood of one another. And this kind of
knowledge is generally called science, and the conclusions thereof
truth. But when men remember not how things are named, by general
agreement, but either mistake and misname things, or name them
aright by chance, they are not said to have science, but opinion,
and the conclusions thence proceeding, are uncertain, and for the
most part erroneous. Now that science in particular, from which
proceed the true and evident conclusions of what is right and wrong,
and what is good and hurtful to the being, and well-being of
mankind, the Latins call _sapientia_, and we by the general name of
wisdom. For generally, not he that hath skill in geometry, or any
other science speculative, but only he that understandeth what
conduceth to the good and government of the people, is called a wise
man. Now that no author of sedition can be wise in this acceptation
of the word, is sufficiently proved, in that it hath been already
demonstrated, that no pretence of sedition can be right or just. And
therefore the authors of sedition must be ignorant of the right of
state, that is to say, unwise. It remaineth therefore, that they be
such, as name things, not according to their true and generally
agreed upon names, but call right and wrong, good and bad, according
to their passions, or according to the authorities of such as they
admire, as Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca, and others of like authority,
who have given the names of right and wrong, as their passions have
dictated; or have followed the authority of other men, as we do
theirs. It is required therefore in an author of sedition, that he
think right, that which is wrong; and profitable, that which is
pernicious; and consequently that there be in him _sapientiæ parum_,
little wisdom.

[Sidenote: That the same are necessarily eloquent.]

14. Eloquence is nothing else but the power of winning belief of
what we say. And to that end we must have aid from the passions of
the hearer. Now to demonstration and teaching of the truth, there
are required long deductions, and great attention, which is
unpleasant to the hearer. Therefore they which seek not truth, but
belief, must take another way, and not only derive what they would
have to be believed, from somewhat believed already, but also, by
aggravations and extenuations, make good and bad, right and wrong,
appear great or less, according as shall serve their turns. And such
is the power of eloquence, as many times a man is made to believe
thereby, that he sensibly feeleth smart and damage, when he feeleth
none, and to enter into rage and indignation, without any other
cause, than what is in the words and passion of the speaker. This
considered, together with the business that he hath to do, who is
the author of rebellion, namely, to make men believe that their
rebellion is just, their discontents grounded upon great injuries,
and their hopes great; there needeth no more to prove, there can be
no author of rebellion, that is not an eloquent and powerful
speaker, and withal, as hath been said before, a man of little
wisdom. For the faculty of speaking powerfully, consisteth in a
habit gotten of putting together passionate words, and applying them
to the present passions of the hearer. are not able to effect.

[Sidenote: In what manner they concur to their common effects.]

15. Seeing then eloquence and want of discretion concur to the
stirring of rebellion, it may be demanded, what part each of these
acteth therein? The daughters of Pelias, king of Thessaly, desiring
to restore their old decrepit father to the vigour of his youth, by
the counsel of Medea, chopped him in pieces, and set him a boiling
with I know not what herbs in a cauldron, but could not revive him
again. So when eloquence and want of judgment go together, want of
judgment, like the daughters of Pelias, consenteth, through
eloquence, which is as the witchcraft of Medea, to cut the
commonwealth in pieces, upon pretence or hope of reformation, which
when things are in combustion, they are not able to effect.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER IX.

1. The law over sovereigns, _salus populi_. 2. That sovereigns ought
    to establish the religion they hold for best. 3. That to forbid
    unnatural copulation, promiscuous use of women, &c. is the law
    of nature. 4. That to leave man as much liberty as may be, &c.
    is the duty of a sovereign by the law of nature. 5. _Meum_ and
    _tuum_, to be set out to the subjects, distinct from one
    another, &c. a duty of sovereigns by the law of nature. 6. An
    extraordinary power for judging the abuses of magistrates,
    necessary, &c. 7. The suppressing of popularity, &c. necessary,
    &c. 8. The instruction of youth, &c. necessary, &c. 9. Avoiding
    of unnecessary war, a necessary duty of the sovereign, &c.


[Sidenote: The law over sovereigns _salus populi_.]

1. Having hitherto set forth how a body politic is made, and how it
may be destroyed, this place requireth to say something concerning
the preservation of the same, not purposing to enter into the
particulars of the art of government, but to sum up the general
heads, wherein such art is to be employed, and in which consisteth
the duty of him or them that have the sovereign power. For the duty
of a sovereign consisteth in the good government of the people. And
although the acts of sovereign power be no injuries to the subjects
who have consented to the same by their implicit wills, yet when
they tend to the hurt of the people in general, they be breaches of
the law of nature, and of the divine law; and consequently, the
contrary acts are the duties of sovereigns, and required at their
hands to the utmost of their endeavour, by God Almighty, under the
pain of eternal death. And as the art and duty of sovereigns consist
in the same acts, so also doth their profit. For the end of art, is
profit; and governing to the profit of the subjects, is governing to
the profit of the sovereign, as hath been showed Part II. chapter V.
section 1. And these three: 1. The law over them that have sovereign
power: 2. Their duty: 3. Their profit: are one and the same thing
contained in this sentence, _Salus populi suprema lex_. By which
must be understood, not the mere preservation of their lives, but
generally their benefit and good. So that this is the general law
for sovereigns, _That they procure, to the uttermost of their
endeavour, the good of the people_.

[Sidenote: That sovereigns ought to establish the religion they hold
           for best.]

2. And forasmuch as eternal is better than temporal good, it is
evident, that they who are in sovereign authority, are by the law of
nature obliged to further the establishing of all such doctrines and
rule, and the commanding of all such actions, as in their conscience
they believe to be the true way thereunto. For unless they do so, it
cannot be said truly, that they have done the uttermost of their
endeavour.

[Sidenote: That to forbid unnatural copulation, promiscuous use of
           women, &c. is the law of nature.]

3. For the temporal good of the people, it consisteth in four
points: 1. Multitude: 2. Commodity of living: 3. Peace amongst
themselves: 4. Defence against foreign power. Concerning multitude,
it is the duty of them that are in sovereign authority, to increase
the people, in as much as they are governors of mankind under God
Almighty, who having created but one man, and one woman, declared,
that it was his will they should be multiplied and increased
afterwards. And seeing this is to be done by ordinances concerning
copulation, they are by the law of nature bound to make such
ordinances concerning the same, as may tend to the increase of
mankind. And hence it cometh, that in them who have sovereign
authority, not to forbid such copulations as are against the use of
nature; not to forbid the promiscuous use of women, not to forbid
one woman to have many husbands, not to forbid marriages within
certain degrees of kindred and affinity, are against the law of
nature. For though it be not evident, that a private man living
under the law of natural reason only, doth break the same, by doing
any of the things aforesaid; yet it is manifestly apparent, that
being so prejudicial as they are to the improvement of mankind, that
not to forbid the same, is against the law of natural reason in him,
that hath taken into his hands any portion of mankind to improve.

[Sidenote: That to leave man as much liberty as may be, &c. is the
           duty of a sovereign by the law of nature.]

4. The commodity of living consisteth in liberty and wealth. By
liberty, I mean, that there be no prohibition without necessity of
any thing to any man, which was lawful to him in the law of nature;
that is to say, that there be no restraint of natural liberty, but
what is necessary for the good of the commonwealth, and that
well-meaning men may not fall into the danger of laws, as into
snares, before they be aware. It appertaineth also to this liberty,
that a man may have commodious passage from place to place, and not
be imprisoned or confined with the difficulty of ways, and want of
means for transportation of things necessary. And for the wealth of
people, it consisteth in three things, the well ordering of trade,
procuring of labour, and forbidding the superfluous consuming of
food and apparel. All those therefore that are in sovereign
authority, and have taken upon them the government of people, are
bound by the law of nature to make ordinances consisting in the
points afore named, as being contrary to the law of nature,
unnecessarily, either for one’s own fancy, to enthral, or tie men
so, as they cannot move without danger; or to suffer them whose
maintenance is our benefit, to want anything necessary for them, by
our negligence.

[Sidenote: _Meum_ and _tuum_, to be set out to the subjects,
           distinct from one another, &c. a duty of sovereigns by
           the law of nature.]

5. For maintaining of peace at home, there be so many things
necessarily to be considered, and taken order in, as there be
several causes concurring to sedition. And first, it is necessary to
set out to every subject, his propriety, and distinct lands and
goods, upon which he may exercise and have the benefit of his own
industry, and without which men would fall out amongst themselves,
as did the herdsmen of Abraham and Lot, every man encroaching and
usurping as much of the common benefit as he can, which tendeth to
quarrel and sedition. Secondly, to divide the burthens and charges
of the commonwealth proportionably. Now there is a _proportionably_
to every man’s ability, and there is a _proportionably_ to his
benefit by commonwealth: and this latter is it, which is according
to the law of nature. For the burdens of the commonwealth being the
price that we pay for the benefit thereof, they ought to be measured
thereby. And there is no reason, when two men equally enjoying, by
the benefit of the commonwealth, their peace and liberty, to use
their industry to get their livings, whereof one spareth, and layeth
up somewhat, the other spendeth all he gets, why they should not
equally contribute to the common charge. That seemeth therefore to
be the most equal way of dividing the burden of public charge, when
every man shall contribute according to what he spendeth, and not
according to what he gets. And this is then done, when men pay the
commonwealth’s part in the payments they make for their own
provision. And this seemeth not only most equal, but also least
sensible, and least to trouble the mind of them that pay it. For
there is nothing so aggravateth the grief of parting with money to
the public, as to think they are over-rated, and that their
neighbours whom they envy, do thereupon insult over them, and this
disposeth them to resistance, and, after that such resistance hath
produced a mischief, to rebellion.

[Sidenote: An extraordinary power for judging the abuses of
           magistrates, necessary, &c.]

6. Another thing necessary for the maintaining of peace, is the due
execution of justice, which consisteth principally in the right
performance of their duties, which are the magistrates, ordained for
the same by and under the authority of the sovereign power, which
being private men in respect of the sovereign, and consequently such
as may have private ends, whereby they may be corrupted with gifts,
or intercession of friends, ought to be kept in awe by an higher
power, lest people, grieved by their injustice, should take upon
them to make their own revenges, to the disturbance of the common
peace; which can by no way be avoided in the principal and immediate
magistrates, without the judicature of the sovereign himself, or
some extraordinary power delegated by him. It is therefore
necessary, that there be a power extraordinary, as there shall be
occasion from time to time, for the syndication of judges and other
magistrates, that shall abuse their authority, to the wrong and
discontent of the people; and a free and open way for the presenting
of grievances to him or them that have the sovereign authority.

[Sidenote: The suppressing of popularity, &c. necessary, &c.]

7. Besides these considerations, by which are prevented the
discontents that arise from oppression, there ought to be some means
for the keeping under of those, that are disposed to rebellion by
ambition; which consist principally in the constancy of him that
hath the sovereign power, who ought therefore constantly to grace
and encourage such, as being able to serve the commonwealth, do
nevertheless contain themselves within the bounds of modesty,
without repining at the authority of such as are employed, and
without aggravating the errors, which, as men, they may commit,
especially when they suffer not in their own particular; and
constantly to show displeasure, and dislike of the contrary. And not
only so, but also to ordain severe punishments for such, as shall by
reprehension of public actions, affect popularity and applause
amongst the multitude, by which they may be enabled to have a
faction in the commonwealth at their devotion.

[Sidenote: The instruction of youth, &c. necessary, &c.]

8. Another thing necessary, is the rooting out of the consciences of
men, all those opinions which seem to justify and give pretence of
right to rebellious actions; such as are the opinions, that a man
can do nothing lawfully against his private conscience; that they
who have the sovereignty, are subject to the civil laws; that there
is any authority of subjects, whose negative may hinder the
affirmative of the sovereign power; that any subject hath a
propriety distinct from the dominion of the commonwealth; that there
is a body of the people without him or them that have the sovereign
power; and that any lawful sovereign may be resisted under the name
of a tyrant; which opinions are they, which, Part II. chap. VIII.
sect. 5-10, have been declared to dispose men to rebellion. And
because opinions which are gotten by education, and in length of
time, are made habitual, cannot be taken away by force, and upon the
sudden; they must therefore be taken away also by time and
education. And seeing the said opinions have proceeded from private
and public teaching, and those teachers have received them from
grounds and principles, which they have learned in the Universities,
from the doctrine of Aristotle, and others, who have delivered
nothing concerning morality and policy demonstratively; but being
passionately addicted to popular government, have insinuated their
opinions by eloquent sophistry. There is no doubt, if the true
doctrine concerning the law of nature, and the properties of a body
politic, and the nature of law in general, were perspicuously set
down and taught in the Universities, but that young men, who come
thither void of prejudice, and whose minds are as white paper,
capable of any instruction, would more easily receive the same, and
afterward teach it to the people, both in books and otherwise, than
now they do the contrary.

[Sidenote: Avoiding of unnecessary war, a necessary duty of the
           sovereign, &c.]

9. The last thing contained in that supreme law, _salus populi_, is
their defence; and consisteth partly in the obedience and unity of
the subjects, of which hath been already spoken, and in which
consisteth the means of levying soldiers, and of having money, arms,
ships, and fortified places in readiness for defence; and partly, in
the avoiding of unnecessary wars. For such commonwealths, or such
monarchs, as affect war for itself, that is to say, out of ambition,
or of vain-glory, or that make account to revenge every little
injury, or disgrace done by their neighbours, if they ruin not
themselves, their fortune must be better than they have reason to
expect.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER X.

1. All expressions, &c. concerning future actions, are either
    covenant, counsel, or command. 2. The difference between a law
    and a covenant. 3. The command of him whose command is law in
    one thing, is law in every thing. 4. The difference between law
    and counsel. 5. The difference between _jus_ and _lex_. 6. The
    division of laws, &c. 7. That the divine moral law, and the law
    of nature, is the same. 8. That the civil laws are the common
    measure of right and wrong, &c. 9. Martial law is civil law. 10.
    Written laws, &c. Unwritten, &c. Customs and opinions, &c.


[Sidenote: All expressions, &c. concerning future actions, are
           either covenant, counsel, or command.]

1. Thus far concerning the Nature of Man, and the constitution and
properties of a Body Politic. There remaineth only for the last
chapter, to speak of the nature and sorts of law. And first it is
manifest, that all laws are declarations of the mind, concerning
some action future to be done, or omitted. And all declarations and
expressions of the mind concerning future actions and omissions, are
either _promissive_, as _I will do, or not do_; or _provisive_, as
for example, _If this be done or not done, this will follow_; or
_imperative_, as _Do this, or do it not_. In the first sort of these
expressions, consisteth the nature of a covenant; in the second,
consisteth counsel; in the third, command.

[Sidenote: The difference between a law and a covenant.]

2. It is evident when a man doth, or forbeareth to do any action, if
he be moved thereto by this only consideration, that the same is
good or evil in itself; and that there be no reason why the will or
pleasure of another, should be of any weight in his deliberation,
that then neither to do nor omit the action deliberated, is any
breach of law. And consequently, whatsoever is a law to a man,
respecteth the will of another, and the declaration thereof. But a
covenant is a declaration of a man’s own will. And therefore a law
and a covenant differ: and though they be both obligatory, and a law
obligeth no otherwise than by virtue of some covenant made by him
who is subject thereunto, yet they oblige by several sorts of
promises. For a covenant obligeth by promise of an action, or
omission especially named and limited; but a law bindeth by a
promise of obedience in general, whereby the action to be done, or
left undone, is referred to the determination of him, to whom the
covenant is made. So that the difference between a covenant and a
law, standeth thus: in simple covenant, the action to be done, or
not done, is first limited and made known, and then followeth the
promise to do or not do; but in a law, the obligation to do or not
to do, precedeth, and the declaration what is to be done, or not
done, followeth after.

[Sidenote: The command of him whose command is law in one thing, is
           law in every thing.]

3. And from this may be deduced, that which to some may seem a
_paradox, That the command of him, whose command is a law in one
thing, is a law in every thing_. For seeing a man is obliged to
obedience before what he is to do be known, he is obliged to obey in
general, that is to say, in every thing.

[Sidenote: The difference between law and counsel.]

4. That the counsel of a man is no law to him that is counselled,
and that he who alloweth another to give him counsel, doth not
thereby oblige himself to follow the same, is manifest enough. And
yet men usually call counselling, by the name of governing; not that
they are not able to distinguish between them, but because they envy
many times those men that are called to counsel, and are therefore
angry with them that they are counselled. But if to counsellors
there should be given a right to have their counsel followed, then
are they no more counsellors, but masters of them whom they counsel;
and their counsels no more counsels, but laws. For the difference
between a law and a counsel being no more but this, that in counsel
the expression is, _Do, because it is best_; in a law, _Do, because
I have a right to compel you_; or _Do, because I say, do_; when
counsel should give the reason of the action it adviseth to, because
the reason thereof itself is no more counsel, but a law.

[Sidenote: The difference between _jus_ & _lex_.]

5. The names _lex_ and _jus_, that is to say, law and right, are
often confounded, and yet scarce are there any two words of more
contrary signification. For right is that liberty which law leaveth
us, and laws those restraints by which we agree mutually to abridge
one another’s liberty. Law and right therefore are no less different
than restraint and liberty, which are contrary; and whatsoever a man
doth, that liveth in a commonwealth _jure_, he doth it _jure
civili_, _jure naturæ_, and _jure divino_. For whatsoever is against
any of these laws, cannot be said to be _jure_. For the civil law
cannot make that to be done _jure_, which is against the law
_divine_, or of _nature_. And therefore whatsoever any subject doth,
if it be not contrary to the civil law, and whatsoever a sovereign
doth, if it be not against the law of nature, he doth it _jure
divino_, by _divine right_. But to say, _lege divinâ_, by _divine
law_, is another thing. For the laws of God and nature allowing
greater liberty than is allowed by the law civil; for subordinate
laws do still bind more than superior laws, the essence of law being
not to loose, but to bind, a man may be commanded that by a law
civil, which is not commanded by the law of nature, nor by the law
divine. So that of things done _lege_, that is to say, by command of
the law, there is some place for a distinction between _lege
divinâ_, and _lege civili_. As when a man giveth an alms, or helpeth
him that is in need, he doth it not _lege civili_, but _lege
divinâ_, by the divine law, the precept whereof is _charity_. But
for things that are done _jure_, nothing can be said to be done
_jure divino_, that is not also _jure civili_, unless it be done by
them that having sovereign power, are not subject to the civil law.

[Sidenote: The division of laws, &c.]

6. The differences of laws, are according to the differences, either
of the authors and lawmakers, or of the promulgation, or of those
that are subject to them. From the difference of the authors, or
lawmakers, cometh the division of law into _divine_, _natural_, and
_civil_. From the difference of promulgation, proceedeth the
division of laws into _written_ and _unwritten_. And from the
difference of the persons to whom the law appertaineth, it
proceedeth, that some laws are called simply laws, and some penal.
As for example, _thou shalt not steal_, is simply a law; but this,
_he that stealeth an ox, shall restore four-fold_, is a penal, or as
others call it, a judicial law. Now in those laws, which are simply
laws, the commandment is addressed to every man; but in penal laws
the commandment is addressed to the magistrate, who is only guilty
of the breach of it, when the penalties ordained, are not inflicted;
to the rest appertained nothing, but to take notice of their danger.

[Sidenote: That the divine moral law, and the law of nature, is the
           same.]

7. As for the first division of law into _divine_, _natural_, and
_civil_, the first two branches are one and the same law. For the
law of nature, which is also the moral law, is the law of the author
of nature, God Almighty; and the law of God taught by our Saviour
Christ, is the moral law. For the sum of God’s law is, _Thou shalt
love God above all, and thy neighbour as thyself_; and the same is
the sum of the law of nature, as hath been showed, Part I. chap. V.
And although the doctrine of our Saviour be of three parts, _moral_,
_theological_, and _ecclesiastical_; the former part only, which is
the moral, is of the nature of a law universal; the latter part is a
branch of the law civil; and the theological, which containeth those
articles concerning the divinity and kingdom of our Saviour, without
which there is no salvation, is not delivered in the nature of laws,
but of counsel and direction, how to avoid the punishment, which by
the violation of the moral law, men are subject to. For it is not
infidelity that condemneth, though it be faith that saveth, but the
breach of the law and commandments of God, written first in man’s
heart, and afterwards in tables, and delivered to the Jews by the
hands of Moses.

[Sidenote: That the civil laws are the common measure of right and
           wrong, &c.]

8. In the state of nature, where every man is his own judge, and
differeth from other concerning the names and appellations of
things, and from those differences arise quarrels and breach of
peace, it was necessary there should be a common measure of all
things, that might fall in controversy. As for example; of what is
to be called right, what good, what virtue, what much, what little,
what _meum_ and _tuum_, what a pound, what a quart, &c. For in these
things private judgments may differ, and beget controversy. This
common measure, some say, is _right reason_: with whom I should
consent, if there were any such thing to be found or known _in rerum
naturâ_. But commonly they that call for _right reason_ to decide
any controversy, do mean their own. But this is certain, seeing
_right reason_ is not existent, the reason of some man or men must
supply the place thereof; and that man or men, is he or they, that
have the sovereign power, as hath been already proved; and
consequently the civil laws are to all subjects the measures of
their actions, whereby to determine, whether they be right or wrong,
profitable or unprofitable, virtuous or vicious; and by them the use
and definition of all names not agreed upon, and tending to
controversy, shall be established. As for example, when upon
occasion of some strange and deformed birth, it shall not be decided
by Aristotle, or the philosophers, whether the same be a man, or no,
but by the laws; the civil law containing in it the ecclesiastical,
as a part thereof, proceeding from the power of ecclesiastical
government, given by our Saviour to all Christian sovereigns, as his
immediate vicars, as hath been said Part II. chap. VII. sect. 10.

[Sidenote: Martial law is civil law.]

9. But seeing it hath been said, that all laws are either natural or
civil, it may be demanded, to which of these shall be referred that
law, which is called martial law, and by the Romans, _disciplina
militaris_? And it may seem to be the same with the law of nature;
because the laws by which a multitude of soldiers are governed in an
army are not constant, but continually changing with the occasion;
and that is still a law, which is reason for the present, and reason
is the law of nature. It is nevertheless true, that martial law is
civil law, because an army is a body politic, the whole power
whereof is in the General, and the laws thereof made by him; and
though they still follow and change as reason requireth, yet it is
not, as the reason of every private man, but as the reason of the
General requireth.

[Sidenote: Written laws, Unwritten, &c. Customs, and Opinions, &c.]

10. When he or they in whom is the sovereign power of a
commonwealth, are to ordain laws for the government and good order
of the people, it is not possible they should comprehend all cases
of controversy that may fall out, or perhaps any considerable
diversity of them: but as time shall instruct them by the rising of
new occasions, so are also laws from time to time to be ordained:
and in such cases where no special law is made, the law of nature
keepeth its place, and the magistrates ought to give sentence
according thereunto, that is to say, according to natural reason.
The constitutions therefore of the sovereign power, by which the
liberty of nature is abridged, are written, because there is no
other way to take notice of them; whereas the laws of nature are
supposed to be written in men’s hearts. Written laws therefore are
the constitutions of a commonwealth expressed; and unwritten, are
the laws of natural reason. Custom of itself maketh no laws.
Nevertheless when a sentence hath been once given, by them that
judge by their natural reason, whether the same be right or wrong,
it may attain to the vigour of a law; not because the like sentence
hath of custom been given in the like case, but because the
sovereign power is supposed tacitly to have approved such sentence
for right, and thereby it cometh to be a law, and numbered amongst
the written laws of the commonwealth. For if custom were sufficient
to introduce a law, then it would be in the power of every one that
is deputed to hear a cause, to make his errors laws. In the like
manner, those laws that go under the title of _responsa prudentum_,
that is to say, the opinions of lawyers, are not therefore laws,
because _responsa prudentum_, but because they are admitted by the
sovereign. And from this may be collected, that when there is a case
of private contract between the sovereign and the subject, a
precedent against reason shall not prejudice the cause of the
sovereign; no precedent being made a law, but upon supposition that
the same was reasonable from the beginning.

And thus much concerning the elements and general grounds of laws
natural and politic. As for the law of nations, it is the same with
the law of nature. For that which is the law of nature between man
and man, before the constitution of commonwealth, is the law of
nations between sovereign and sovereign, after.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   OF
                         LIBERTY AND NECESSITY:

                            A TREATISE,

                 WHEREIN ALL CONTROVERSY CONCERNING

            PREDESTINATION, ELECTION, FREE-WILL, GRACE,
                      MERITS, REPROBATION, &c.

                   IS FULLY DECIDED AND CLEARED.

                      IN ANSWER TO A TREATISE
               WRITTEN BY THE BISHOP OF LONDONDERRY,
                        ON THE SAME SUBJECT.

                                 TO THE
                       SOBER AND DISCREET READER.


It made St. Chrysostom tremble whenever he reflected on the
proportion, which those that went the _narrow_ way, bore to those
which marched in the _broad_, how _many_ were the called, and how
_few_ the chosen, how many they were that were created for and in a
capacity of eternal beatitude, and how few attained it. This
consideration certainly would make a man look upon the Holy
Scriptures, among Christians, as the greatest indulgence of heaven,
being all the directions it hath been pleased to afford poor _man_
in so difficult a journey as that of his eternal bliss or misery.
But when a man cometh to look into those transcendant writings, he
finds them to be the works of a sort of innocent harmless men, that
had little acquaintance or familiarity with the world, and
consequently not much interested in the troubles and quarrels of
several countries; that though they are all but necessary, yet were
they written occasionally, rather than out of design; and lastly,
that their main business is, to abstract man from this world, and to
persuade him to prefer the bare hope of what he can neither _see_,
_hear_, nor _conceive_, before all the present enjoyments this world
can afford. This begat a reverence and esteem to them in all those
who endeavour to work out their salvation out of them. But if a man,
not weighing them in themselves, shall consider the practices of
those, who pretend to be the interpreters of them, and to make them
fit meat for the people; how that instead of renouncing the world,
they endeavour to raise themselves into the greatest promotions,
leisure, and luxury; that they make them the decoys of the people,
to carry on designs and intrigues of state, and study the enjoyments
of this world more than any other people: he will find some grounds
to conclude, the practices of such men to be the greatest
disturbance, burden, and vexation of the Christian part of the
world. The complaint is as true as sad; instead of acquainting the
credulous vulgar, with the main end of their functions, and the
great business of their embassy, what a great measure of felicity is
prepared for them, and how easily it may be forfeited; they involve
their consciences in the briars of a thousand needless scruples,
they spin out volumes out of half sentences, nay, out of points and
accents, and raise endless controversies about things, (were men
free from passion and prejudice), in themselves clear enough: and
when they have canvassed their questions, till they are weary
themselves, and have wearied hearers and readers, and all they have
to do with, every one sits down under his own vine, and hugs his own
apprehensions; so that after all their pains, bandings, and
implacable adhesion to parties, the inconvenience remains still, and
we as far from any solid conviction, as at first setting out.

The controversies betwixt _Rome_ and the _Reformation_ are long
since beaten out of the pit, by other combatants of their own brood;
so that if we speak of _Protestant_ and _Catholic_, they are in a
manner content to sit down with their present acquests: for as to
conviction, he certainly is a rare _proselyte_, at whose conversion,
_interest_, _humour_, _discontent_, _inclination_, are not admitted
to the debate.

But to come yet nearer our purpose, let us consider our own
fractions of fractions of _religion_ here in England, where if that
saying, that _it is better to live where nothing is lawful, than
where all things_, be as true in _religion_ as _policy_, posterity
may haply feel the sad consequence of it. What, I pray, is the
effect of so many _sermons_, _teachings_, _preachings_,
_exercises_, and _exercising of gifts_, _meetings_, _disputations_,
_conferences_, _conventicles_, _printed books_, written with so much
distraction and presumption upon God Almighty, and abuse of his Holy
Word? Marry this: it is the seminary of many vexatious, endless, and
fruitless controversies, the consequence whereof are jealousies,
heart-burnings, exasperation of parties, the introduction of
factions and national quarrels into matters of religion, and
consequently all the calamities of war and devastation. Besides,
they are good lawful diversions for the duller sort of _citizens_,
who contract diseases for want of motion; they supply the building
of pyramids among the Egyptians, by diverting the thoughts of the
people from matters of state, and consequently from rebellion.

They find work for _printers_, &c. if the parties interested are
troubled with the itch of popularity, and will suffer themselves to
be scratched out of somewhat by way of contribution to the
impression. Hence is the _stationer’s_ shop furnished, and thence
the _minister’s_ study in the country, who having found out the
humour of his auditory, consults with his stationer, on what books
his money is best bestowed; who very gravely, it may be, will
commend _Cole upon the Philippians_ before the excellent, but
borrowed, _Caryl upon Job_. But as to any matter of conviction, we
see every one _acquiesces_ in his own sentiments, every one hears
the teacher who is most to his humour; and when he hath been at
church, and pretends to have sat at his feet, comes home and
censures him as he pleases.

To be yet a little more particular, what shall we think of those
vast and involuble volumes concerning _predestination_, _free-will_,
_free-grace_, _election_, _reprobation_, &c., which fill not only
our libraries, but the world with their noise and disturbance,
whereof the least thing we are to expect is _conviction_; every side
endeavouring to make good their own grounds, and keep the cudgels in
their hands as long as they can? What stir is there between the
Molinists and Jansenists about _grace_ and _merits_; and yet both
pretend St. Augustin!

Must we not expect, that the Jesuits will, were it for no other end
but to vindicate that reputation of learning they have obtained in
the world, endeavour to make good their tenets, though the other
were the truer opinion? Is truth then retired to that inaccessible
rock that admits no approaches? Or are we all turned Ixions, and
instead of enjoying that Juno, entertain ourselves with the _clouds_
of our own persuasions; of which unnatural coition, what other issue
can there be but Centaurs and monstrous opinions? To these questions
I shall not presume to answer, but in the words of this great
author, who answering the charge of _impiety_ laid upon the holding
of necessity, says thus; _If we consider the greatest part of
mankind, not as they should be, but as they are, that is as men,
whom either the study of acquiring wealth and preferment, or whom
the appetite of sensual delights, or the impatience of meditating,
or the rash embracing of wrong principles, have made unapt to
discuss the truth of things, I must confess, &c._

Certainly we have some reason to expect an effectual cure from this
man, since he hath so fortunately found out the disease. Now if he
in so few sheets hath performed more than all the voluminous
works of the _priests and ministers_, and that in points of
soul-concernment and Christian interest, as _predestination_,
_free-will_, _grace_, _merits_, _election_, _reprobation_,
_necessity_, and _liberty_ of actions, and others, the main hinges
of human _salvation_; and to do this, being a person, whom not only
the averseness of his nature to engage himself in matters
of controversy of this kind, but his severer study of the
_mathematics_, might justly exempt from any such skirmishes; we may
not stick to infer, that the _black-coats_, generally taken, are a
sort of ignorant _tinkers_, who in matters of their own profession,
such as is the _mending_ and _soldering_ of men’s _consciences_,
have made more _holes_ than they found; nay, what makes them more
impardonable, they have neither the gratitude nor ingenuity to
acknowledge this repairer of their breaches, and assertor of their
reputation, who hath now effected what they all this while have been
tampering about. I know this author is little beholden to the
_ministers_, and they make a great part of the nation; and besides
them, I know there are many illiterate, obstinate, and inconvincible
spirits: yet I dare advance this proposition, how bold soever it may
seem to some; that this book, how little and contemptible soever it
may seem, contains more evidence and conviction in the matters it
treats of, than all the volumes, nay libraries, which the _priests_,
_jesuits_, and _ministers_ have, to our great charge, distraction,
and loss of precious time, furnished us with. Which if so, I shall
undertake for any rational man, that all the controversial labours
concerning religion in the world, all the polemical treatises of the
most ancient or modern, shall never breed any maggots of scruples,
or dissatisfactions in his brains, nor shall his eyes or head ever
ache with turning them over; but he shall be so resolved in mind, as
never to importune God Almighty with impertinent addresses, nor ever
become any of those enthusiastical _spiritati_, who, as the most
learned Mr. White says, _expound Scripture without sense or reason_,
and are not to be disputed with but with the same success as men
write on sand, and trouble their neighbours with their dreams,
revelations, and spiritual whimsies. No! here is solid conviction,
at least so far as the metaphysical mysteries of our religion will
admit. If God be _omnipotent_, he is _irresistible_; if so, _just_
in all his actions, though we, who have as much capacity to measure
the justice of God’s actions as a man born blind to judge of
colours, haply may not discern it. What then need any man trouble
his head, whether he be predestinated or no? Let him live justly and
honestly according to the _religion_ of his _country_, and refer
himself to God for the rest, since he is the potter, and may do what
he please with the vessel. But I leave the reader to find his
satisfaction in the treatise itself, since it may be I derogate from
it by saying so much before it. This book, I doubt not, will find no
worse entertainment than the _Leviathan_, both in regard of its
bulk, and that it doth not strike so home at the _ministers_ and
_Catholic_ party as that did. And yet here we must complain of want
of sufficiency or ingenuity to acknowledge the truths or confute the
errors of that book; which till it is done, we shall not count the
author an heretic. On this side the sea, besides the dirt and
slander cast on him in _sermons_ and private meetings, none hath put
anything in print against him, but Mr. Rosse; one who may be said to
have had so much learning, as to have been perpetually barking at
the works of the most learned. How he hath been received beyond seas
I know not, but certainly, not without the regret of the
_Catholics_; who building their _church_ on other foundations than
those of the _Scriptures_, and pretending _infallibility_,
_certitude_, and _unity_ in _religion_, cannot but be discontented
that these prerogatives of religion are taken away, not only from
_tradition_, that is to say, from the _church_, but also from the
_Scriptures_, and are invested in the _supreme power_ of the nation,
be it of what persuasion it will.

Thus much, Reader, I have thought fit to acquaint thee with, that
thou mightest know what a jewel thou hast in thy hands, which thou
must accordingly value, not by the bulk, but the preciousness. Thou
hast here in a few sheets what might prove work enough for many
thousand sermons and exercises; and more than the _catechisms_ and
_confessions_ of a thousand _assemblies_ could furnish thee with:
thou hast what will cast an eternal blemish on all the _cornered_
caps of _priests_ and _jesuits_, and all the _black and white_ caps
of the _canting tribe_; to be short, thou art now acquainted with
that man, who, in matters of so great importance as those of thy
salvation, furnishes thee with better instructions, than any thou
hast ever yet been acquainted with, what _profession_, _persuasion_,
_opinion_, or _church_ soever thou art of; of whom and his works
make the best use thou canst. Farewell.




pm hrdbl




                                 TO THE
                       LORD MARQUIS OF NEWCASTLE.


                                -------


    RIGHT HONOURABLE,

I had once resolved to answer my Lord Bishop’s objections to my book
DE CIVE in the first place, as that which concerns me most; and
afterwards to examine his Discourse of LIBERTY and NECESSITY, which,
because I had never uttered my opinion of it, concerned me the less.
But seeing it was your Lordship’s and my Lord Bishop’s desire that I
should begin with the _latter_, I was contented so to do, and here I
present and submit it to your Lordship’s judgment.

And first I assure your Lordship I find in it no new argument
neither from _Scripture_ nor from _reason_, that I have not often
heard before, which is as much as to say, I am not surprised.

The _preface_ is a handsome one, but it appeareth even in that, that
he hath mistaken the question. For whereas he says thus, _If I be
free to write this Discourse, I have obtained the cause_: I deny
that to be true, for it is enough to his freedom of writing, that he
had not written it, unless he would himself. If he will obtain the
cause, he must prove that before he writ it, it was not necessary he
should prove it afterward. It may be his Lordship thinks it all one
to say, _I was free_ to write it, and, _It was not necessary_ I
should write it. But I think otherwise. For he is _free_ to do a
thing, that may do it if he have the will to do it, and may forbear,
if he have the will to forbear. And yet if there be a _necessity_
that he shall have the _will_ to do it, the action is necessarily to
follow: and if there be a _necessity_ that he shall have the _will_
to forbear, the forbearing also will be necessary. The question
therefore is not, whether a man be a _free agent_, that is to say,
whether he can write or forbear, speak or be silent, according to
his _will_; but, whether the _will_ to write, and the _will_ to
forbear, come upon him according to his _will_, or according to
anything else in his own power. I acknowledge this _liberty_, that I
_can_ do if I _will_; but to say, I can _will_ if I _will_, I take
to be an absurd speech. Wherefore I cannot grant my Lord the cause
upon his _preface_.

In the next place, he maketh certain distinctions of _liberty_, and
says he meaneth not _liberty_ from sin, nor from _servitude_, nor
from _violence_; but, from _necessity_, _necessitation_,
_inevitability_, and _determination to one_.

It had been better to _define_ liberty, than thus to _distinguish_.
For I understand never the more what he means by _liberty_; and
though he say he means _liberty_ from _necessitation_, yet I
understand not how such a _liberty_ can be, and it is a taking of
the question without proof. For what is else the question between
us, but whether _such_ a liberty be possible or not?

There are in the same place other distinctions: as a liberty of
_exercise only_, which he calls a _liberty of contradiction_, namely
of doing not good, or evil _simply_, but of doing this or that good,
or this or that evil _respectively_, and a _liberty of specification
and exercise also_, which he calls a liberty of _contrariety_,
namely a liberty not only to do good or evil, but also to do or not
do this or that good or evil.

And with these _distinctions_ his Lordship says he _clears the
coast_, whereas in truth, he darkeneth his own meaning and
the question, not only with the jargon of _exercise only_,
_specification also_, _contradiction_, _contrariety_, but also with
pretending distinction where none is: for how is it possible that
the _liberty_ of doing or not doing this or that good or evil, can
consist, as he says it does in God and good angels, without a
liberty of doing or not doing good or evil?

The next thing his Lordship does, after clearing of the coast, is
the dividing of his forces, as he calls them, into _two_ squadrons,
_one_ of places _of Scriptures_, the _other_ of _reasons_, which
allegory he useth, I suppose, because he addresseth the discourse to
your Lordship, who is a military man. All that I have to say
touching this, is, that I observe a great part of those his _forces_
do look and _march_ another way, and some of them _fight_ amongst
themselves.

And the first place of _Scripture_, taken from Numb. xxx. 13, is one
of those that look another way; the words are, _If a wife make a
vow, it is left to her husband’s choice either to establish it or
make it void_. For it proves no more but that the husband is a
_free_ and _voluntary agent_, but not that his _choice_ therein is
not _necessitated_ or not _determined_ to what he shall choose, by
precedent _necessary_ causes.

For if there come into the husband’s mind greater good by
establishing than abrogating such a vow, the establishing will
follow necessarily; and if the evil that will follow in the
husband’s opinion outweigh the good, the contrary must needs follow:
and yet in this following of one’s _hopes_ and _fears_, consisteth
the nature of _election_. So that a man may both choose this, and
cannot but choose this, and consequently _choosing_ and _necessity_
are joined together.

The second place of Scripture is Joshua, xxiv. 15. The third is 2
Sam. xxiv. 12, whereby it is clearly proved, that there is
_election_ in _man_, but not proved that such _election_ was not
_necessitated_ by the _hopes_, and _fears_, and considerations of
_good_ and _bad_ to follow, which depend not on the _will_, nor are
subject to _election_. And therefore one answer serves all such
places, if there were a thousand.

But his Lordship supposing, it seems, I might answer, as I have
done, that _necessity_ and _election_ might stand together, and
instance in the actions of _children_, _fools_, or _brute beasts_,
whose _fancies_, I might say, are _necessitated_ and _determined_ to
_one_; before these his proofs out of Scripture, desires to prevent
that instance, and therefore says that the actions of _children_,
_fools_, _madmen_, and _beasts_, are indeed _determined_, but that
they proceed not from _election_, nor from _free_, but from
_spontaneous agents_. As for example, that the _bee_, when it maketh
honey, does it _spontaneously_; and when the _spider_ makes his web,
he does it _spontaneously_, but not by _election_.

Though I never meant to ground my answer upon the experience of what
_children_, _fools_, _madmen_, and _beasts_ do; yet that your
Lordship may understand what can be meant by _spontaneous_, and how
it differeth from _voluntary_, I will answer that _distinction_, and
show that it _fighteth_ against its fellow arguments.

Your Lordship therefore is to consider, that all _voluntary_
actions, where the thing that induceth the _will_ is not _fear_, are
called also _spontaneous_, and said to be done by a man’s _own_
accord. As when a man giveth money voluntarily to another for
merchandise, or out of affection, he is said to do it of his own
accord, which in Latin is _sponte_, and therefore the action is
_spontaneous_; though to give one’s money willingly to a thief to
avoid killing, or throw it into the sea to avoid drowning, where the
motive is _fear_, be not called _spontaneous_. But every
_spontaneous_ action is not therefore _voluntary_, for _voluntary_
presupposes some precedent _deliberation_, that is to say, some
_consideration_, and _meditation_, of what is likely to _follow_,
both upon the doing, and abstaining from the action deliberated of;
whereas many actions are done of our _own_ accord, and are therefore
_spontaneous_, for which nevertheless, as my Lord thinks, we never
_consulted_ nor _deliberated_ in ourselves. As when making no
question nor any the least doubt in the world, but the thing we are
about is good, we _eat_ and _walk_, or in anger _strike_ or
_revile_, which my Lord thinks spontaneous, but not voluntary nor
elective actions, and with _such_ kind of actions, he says
_necessitation_ may stand, but not with such as are _voluntary_, and
proceed upon _election_ and _deliberation_. Now if I make it appear
to your Lordship, that those actions, which, he says, proceed from
_spontaneity_, and which he ascribes to _children_, _fools_,
_madmen_, and _beasts_, proceed from _election_ and _deliberation_,
and that actions _inconsiderate_, _rash_, and _spontaneous_, are
ordinarily found in those, that are by themselves and many more
thought as _wise_, or wiser than ordinarily men are, then my Lord
Bishop’s argument concludeth, that _necessity_ and _election_ may
stand together, which is contrary to that which he intendeth by all
the rest of his arguments to prove.

And first your Lordship’s own experience furnishes you with proof
enough, that _horses_, _dogs_, and other brute _beasts_, do _demur_
oftentimes upon the way they are to take, the horse retiring from
some strange figure that he sees, and coming on again to avoid the
spur. And what else doth a man that _deliberateth_, but one while
_proceed_ toward action, another while _retire_ from it, as the
_hope_ of greater _good_ draws him, or the _fear_ of greater evil
_drives_ him away.

A _child_ may be so young as to do what it does without all
_deliberation_, but that is but till it have the chance to be hurt
by doing of somewhat, or till it be of age to understand the rod:
for the actions, wherein he hath once had a check, shall be
_deliberated_ on the second time.

_Fools_ and _madmen_ manifestly _deliberate_ no less than the
_wisest_ men, though they make not so good a _choice_, the images of
things being by disease altered.

For _bees_ and _spiders_, if my Lord Bishop had had so little to do
as to be a spectator of their actions, he would have confessed not
only _election_, but _art_, _prudence_, and _policy_, in them, very
near equal to that of mankind. Of _bees_, Aristotle says, _their
life is civil_.

Again, his Lordship is deceived, if he think any _spontaneous_
action, after once being checked in it, differs from an action
_voluntary_ and _elective_: for even the setting of a man’s foot, in
the posture for _walking_, and the action of ordinary _eating_, was
once _deliberated_ of how and when it should be done, and though
afterward it became _easy_ and _habitual_, so as to be done without
_forethought_; yet that does not hinder but that the act is
_voluntary_, and proceedeth from _election_. So also are the
_rashest_ actions of _choleric_ persons _voluntary_ and upon
_deliberation_: for who is there but very young children, that hath
not _considered_ when and how far he _ought_, or safely _may_ strike
or revile? Seeing then his Lordship agrees with me, that such
actions are _necessitated_, and the _fancy_ of those that do them
_determined_ to the action they do, it follows out of his Lordship’s
own doctrine, that the liberty of _election_ does not take away the
_necessity_ of _electing_ this or that _individual_ thing. And thus
one of his arguments fights against another.

The second argument from Scripture, consisteth in histories of men
that did one thing, when if they would, they might have done
another; the places are two: one is 1 Kings iii. 10, where the
history says, God was pleased that Solomon, who might, if he would,
have asked _riches_, or _revenge_, did nevertheless ask _wisdom_ at
God’s hands: the other is the words of St. Peter to Ananias, Acts v.
4: _After it was sold, was it not in thine own power?_

To which the answer is the same with that I answered to the former
places, that they prove there is _election_, but do not disprove the
_necessity_, which I maintain, of what they so elect.

The fourth argument (for to the third and fifth I shall make but one
answer) is to this effect; _If the decrees of God, or his
foreknowledge, or the influence of the stars, or the concatenation
of causes, or the physical or moral efficacy of causes, or the last
dictate of the understanding, or whatsoever it be, do take away true
liberty, then Adam before his fall had no true liberty. Quicquid
ostendes mihi sic incredulus odi._

_That_ which I say _necessitateth and determinateth every action_,
that his Lordship may no longer doubt of my meaning, _is the sum of
all things, which being now existent, conduce and concur to the
production of that action hereafter, whereof if any one thing now
were wanting, the effect could not be produced_. This _concourse_ of
_causes_, whereof every one is _determined_ to be such as it is by a
like concourse of _former_ causes, may well be called (in respect
they were all set and ordered by the eternal cause of all things,
God Almighty) the _decree_ of God.

But that the _foreknowledge_ of God should be a cause of any thing,
cannot be truly said, seeing foreknowledge is knowledge, and
knowledge depends on the existence of the things known, and not they
on it.

The _influence of the stars_ is but a small part of the whole cause,
consisting of the concourse of all agents.

Nor does the _concourse of all causes_ make one simple _chain_ or
concatenation, but an innumerable number of chains, joined together,
not in all parts, but in the first link God Almighty; and
consequently the whole cause of an event, doth not always depend on
one single chain, but on many together.

_Natural_ efficacy of _objects_ does _determine voluntary_ agents,
and _necessitates_ the _will_, and consequently the _action_; but
for _moral_ efficacy, I understand not what he means.

_The last dictate of the judgment_, concerning the good or bad, that
may follow on any action, is not properly the _whole cause_, but the
last part of it, and yet may be said to produce the effect
_necessarily_, in such manner as the last feather may be said to
break a horse’s back, when there were so many laid on before as
there wanted but that one to do it.

Now for his _argument_, that _if the concourse of all the causes
necessitate the effect, that then it follows, Adam had no true
liberty_: I deny the consequence; for I make not only the _effect_,
but also the _election_, of that particular effect _necessary_,
inasmuch as the will itself, and each propension of a man during his
deliberation, is as much necessitated, and depends on a sufficient
cause, as any thing else whatsoever. As for example, it is no more
necessary that fire should burn, than that a man or other creature,
whose limbs be moved by fancy, should have _election_, that is
_liberty_, to do what he hath a fancy to do, though it be not in his
_will_ or _power_ to _choose_ his _fancy_, or choose his _election_
and _will_.

This doctrine, because my Lord Bishop says he hates, I doubt had
better been suppressed, as it should have been, if both your
Lordship and he had not pressed me to an answer.

The arguments of greatest consequence, are the third and the fifth,
and they fall both into one, namely: _If there be a necessity of all
events, that it will follow, that praise and reprehension, and
reward and punishment, are all vain and unjust; and that if God
should openly forbid, and secretly necessitate the same action,
punishing men for what they could not avoid, there would be no
belief among them of heaven and hell_.

To oppose hereunto I must borrow an answer from St. Paul, Rom. ix.
20, 21. From the eleventh verse of the chapter to the eighteenth, is
laid down the very same objection in these words: _When they_,
meaning Esau and Jacob, _were yet unborn, and had done neither good
nor evil, that the purpose of God according to election, not by
works, but by him that calleth, might remain firm, it was said unto
her_ (_viz._ Rebecca) _that the elder should serve the younger_, &c.
_What then shall we say? Is there injustice with God? God forbid. It
is not therefore in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but
in God that showeth mercy. For the Scripture saith to Pharaoh, I
have stirred thee up that I might show my power in thee, and that my
name might be set forth in all the earth. Therefore whom God
willeth, he hath mercy on, and whom he willeth he hardeneth._ Thus
you see the case put by St. Paul, is the same with that of my Lord
Bishop, and the same objection in these words following:

_Thou wilt ask me then, why does God yet complain, for who hath
resisted his will?_

To this therefore the Apostle answers, not by denying it was God’s
_will_, or that the decree of God concerning Esau was not before he
had sinned, or that Esau was not necessitated to do what he did; but
thus: _Who art thou, O man, that interrogatest God? Shall the work
say to the workman, why hast thou made me thus? Hath not the potter
power over the clay, of the same stuff to make one vessel to honour,
another to dishonour?_ According therefore to this answer of St.
Paul, I answer my Lord’s objection, and say, the _power_ of God
alone without other helps is sufficient _justification_ of any
action he doth. That which men make amongst themselves here by pacts
and covenants, and call by the name of justice, and according
whereunto men are accounted and termed rightly _just_ or _unjust_,
is not that by which God Almighty’s actions are to be measured or
called just, no more than his counsels are to be measured by human
wisdom. That which he does, is made just by his doing it; just, I
say, in him, though not always just in us.

For a man that shall command a thing openly, and plot secretly the
hindrance of the same, if he punish him that he so commandeth, for
not doing it, it is unjust. So also, his counsels are therefore not
in vain, because they be his, whether we see the use of them or not.
When God afflicted Job, he did object no sin unto him, but justified
his afflicting of him, by telling him of his _power_: (Job xl. 9:)
_Hast thou, saith God, an arm like mine?_ (Job xxviii. 4): _Where
wert thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?_ and the like.
So our Saviour, (John ix. 3) concerning the man that was born blind,
said, it was not for his sin, or for his parents' sin, but that the
power of God might be shown in him. _Beasts_ are subject to death
and torments, yet they cannot sin: it was God’s will they should be
so. _Power irresistible justifies all actions, really and properly_,
in whomsoever it be found; less power does not, and because such
power is in God only, he must needs be just in all actions, and we,
that not comprehending his counsels, call him to the bar, commit
injustice in it.

I am not ignorant of the usual reply to his answer, by
distinguishing between _will_ and _permission_, as that God Almighty
does indeed sometimes _permit_ sins, and that he also foreknoweth
that the sin he permitteth, shall be committed, but does not _will_
it, nor _necessitate_ it.

I know also they distinguish the action from the sin of the action,
saying, that God Almighty does indeed cause the _action_, whatsoever
action it be, but not the _sinfulness_ or _irregularity_ of it, that
is, the _discordance_ between the _action_ and the _law_. Such
distinctions as these dazzle my understanding; I find no difference
between the _will_ to have a thing done, and the _permission_ to do
it, when he that permitteth can hinder it, and knows that it will be
done unless he hinder it. Nor find I any difference between an
_action_ and the _sin_ of that action; as for example, between the
killing of Uriah, and the sin of David in killing Uriah, nor when
_one_ is _cause_ both of the _action_ and of the _law_, how
_another_ can be cause of the _disagreement_ between them, no more
than how one man making a longer and a shorter garment, another can
make the inequality that is between them. This I know; God cannot
sin, because his doing a thing makes it just, and consequently, no
sin; as also because whatsoever can sin, is subject to another’s
law, which God is not. And therefore it is blasphemy to say, God can
sin; but to say, that God can so order the world, as a sin may be
necessarily caused thereby in a man, I do not see how it is any
dishonour to him. Howsoever, if such or other _distinctions_ can
make it clear, that St. Paul did not think Esau’s or Pharaoh’s
actions proceeded from the _will_ and _purpose_ of God, or that
proceeding from his will, could not therefore without injustice be
blamed or punished, I will, as soon as I understand them, turn unto
my Lord’s opinion: for I now hold nothing in all this question
betwixt us, but what seemeth to me, not obscurely, but most
expressly said in this place by St. Paul. And thus much in answer to
his places of Scripture.


                                -------


                     TO THE ARGUMENTS FROM REASON.

Of the arguments from _reason_, the first is that which his Lordship
saith is drawn from Zeno’s beating of his man, which is therefore
called _argumentum baculinum_, that is to say, a wooden argument.
The story is this; Zeno held, that all actions were necessary; his
man therefore being for some fault beaten, excused himself upon the
necessity of it: to avoid this excuse, his master pleaded likewise
the necessity of beating him. So that not he that maintained, but he
that derided the necessity, was beaten, contrary to that his
Lordship would infer. And the argument was rather withdrawn than
drawn from the story.

The second argument is taken from certain inconveniences which his
Lordship thinks would follow such an opinion. It is true that ill
use might be made of it, and therefore your Lordship and my Lord
Bishop ought, at my request, to keep private what I say here of it.
But the inconveniences are indeed none, and what use soever be made
of truth, yet truth is truth, and now the question is not, what is
fit to be preached, but, what is true.

The first inconvenience he says, is this; _That the laws, which
prohibit any action, will be unjust_.

2. _That all consultations are vain._

3. _That admonitions to men of understanding, are of no more use,
than to children, fools, and madmen._

4. _That, praise, dispraise, reward and punishment, are in vain._

5, 6. _That counsels, acts, arms, books, instruments, study, tutors,
medicines, are in vain._

To which arguments his Lordship expecting I should answer, by
saying, the ignorance of the event were enough to make us use the
means, adds, as it were a reply to my answer foreseen, these words:
_Alas! how should our not knowing the event be a sufficient motive
to make us use the means?_ Wherein his Lordship says right, but my
answer is not that which he expecteth: I answer,

First, that the _necessity_ of an _action_ doth not make the _laws_,
that prohibit it, _unjust_. To let pass, that not the _necessity_,
but the _will_ to break the _law_, maketh the action _unjust_,
because the _law_ regardeth the _will_, and no other precedent
causes of action. And to let pass, that no _law_ can possibly be
_unjust_, inasmuch as every man maketh, by his consent, the law he
is bound to keep, and which consequently must be just, unless a man
can be unjust to himself. I say, what _necessary_ cause soever
precede an _action_, yet if the action be _forbidden_, he that doth
it _willingly_ may justly be punished. For instance, suppose the law
on pain of death prohibit stealing, and that there be a man, who by
the strength of temptation is _necessitated_ to steal, and is
thereupon put to death, does not this punishment deter others from
theft? Is it not a cause that others steal not? Doth it not frame
and make their wills to justice?

To make the _law_, is therefore to make a _cause_ of _justice_, and
to _necessitate_ justice; and consequently, it is no injustice to
make such a law.

The intention of the _law_ is not to grieve the _delinquent_, for
that which is past, and not to be undone; but to make him and others
_just_, that else would not be so, and respecteth not the evil act
_past_, but the _good to come_; insomuch as without the good
intention for the future, no past act of a delinquent could justify
his killing in the sight of God. But you will say, how is it just to
kill one man to amend another, if what were done were _necessary_?
To this I answer, that men are justly killed, not for that their
_actions_ are not _necessitated_, but because they are _noxious_,
and they are spared and preserved whose actions are not noxious. For
where there is no law, there no killing nor anything else can be
unjust; and by the right of nature, we destroy, without being
unjust, all that is noxious, both beasts and men; and for beasts we
kill them justly, when we do it in order to our own preservation,
and yet my Lord himself confesseth, that their actions, as being
only _spontaneous_, and not _free_, are all _necessitated_ and
determined to that one thing they shall do. For men, when we make
societies or commonwealths, we lay not down our right to kill,
excepting in certain cases, as murder, theft or other offensive
action; so that the right, which the _commonwealth_ hath to put a
man to death for crimes, is not created by the _law_, but remains
from the first right of _nature_, which every man hath to preserve
himself; for that the law doth not take the right away in the case
of criminals, who were by the law excepted. Men are not therefore
put to death, or punished, for that their theft proceedeth from
_election_; but because it was _noxious_ and contrary to men’s
preservation, and the punishment conducing to the preservation of
the rest, inasmuch as to punish those that do voluntary hurt, and
none else, frameth and maketh men’s _wills_ such as men would have
them. And thus it is plain, that from the _necessity_ of a
_voluntary_ action, cannot be inferred the _injustice_ of the _law_
that forbiddeth it, or the magistrate that punisheth it.

Secondly, I deny that it maketh _consultations_ to be in _vain_; it
is the _consultation_ that _causeth_ a man, and _necessitateth_ him
to _choose_ to do one thing rather than another: so that unless a
man say that that cause is in vain which necessitateth the effect,
he cannot infer the superfluousness of consultation out of the
necessity of the election proceeding from it. But it seemeth his
Lordship reasons thus: If I must do this rather than that, I shall
do this rather than that, though I consult not at all; which is a
false proposition and a false consequence, and no better than this:
If I shall live till to-morrow, I shall live till to-morrow, though
I run myself through with a sword to-day. If there be a _necessity_
that an action shall be done, or that any effect shall be brought to
pass, it does not therefore follow, that there is nothing
necessarily requisite as a means to bring it to pass; and therefore
when it is determined, that one thing shall be chosen before
another, it is determined also for what _cause_ it shall so be
chosen, which cause, for the most part, is _deliberation_ or
_consultation_, and therefore consultation is not in vain, and
indeed the less in vain by how much the election is more
necessitated, if _more_ and _less_ had any place in _necessity_.

The same answer is to be given to the third supposed inconvenience,
namely, that _admonitions_ are in _vain_; for the admonitions are
parts of consultation, the admonitor being a counsellor for the time
to him that is admonished.

The fourth pretended inconvenience is, that _praise_, _dispraise_,
_reward_, and _punishment_ will be in _vain_. To which I answer,
that for _praise_ and _dispraise_, they depend not at all on the
_necessity_ of the action praised or dispraised. For what is it else
to _praise_, but to say a thing is good? Good, I say, for me, or for
somebody else, or for the state and commonwealth? And what is it to
say an action is good, but to say it is as I would wish? or as
another would have it, or according to the will of the state? that
is to say, according to the law. Does my Lord think that no action
can please me, or him, or the commonwealth, that should proceed from
_necessity_? Things may be therefore _necessary_, and yet
_praise-worthy_, as also _necessary_, and yet _dispraised_, and
neither of them both in vain, because _praise_ and _dispraise_, and
likewise _reward_ and _punishment_, do by example make and conform
the will to good and evil. It was a very great praise in my opinion,
that Velleius Paterculus (Lib. ii. 35) gives Cato, where he says
that he was good by _nature_, _et quia aliter esse non potuit_.

To the fifth and sixth inconveniences, that _counsels_, _arts_,
_arms_, _instruments_, _books_, _study_, _medicines_, and the like,
would be _superfluous_, the same answer serves as to the former,
that is to say, that this consequence, _if the effect shall
necessarily come to pass, then it shall come to pass without its
causes_, is a false one, and those things named counsels, arts,
arms, &c. are the causes of these effects.

His Lordship’s _third_ argument consisteth in other
_inconveniences_, which he saith will follow, namely, _impiety_ and
_negligence_ of religious duties, as repentance, and _zeal_ to God’s
service, &c.

To which I answer as to the rest, that they follow not. I must
confess, if we consider the greatest part of mankind, not as they
should be, but as they are, that is, as men, whom either the study
of acquiring wealth, or preferment, or whom the appetite of sensual
delights, or the impatience of meditating, or the rash embracing of
wrong principles, have made unapt to discuss the truth of things: I
must, I say, confess that the dispute of this question will rather
hurt than help their piety; and therefore if his Lordship had not
desired this answer, I should not have written it, nor do I write it
but in hopes your Lordship and his will keep it private.
Nevertheless in very truth, the _necessity_ of events does not of
itself draw with it any _impiety_ at all. For _piety_ consisteth
only in _two_ things; one, that we honour God in our hearts, which
is, that we think as highly of his _power_ as we can, for to honour
anything is nothing else but to think it to be of great power; the
other is, that we signify that honour and esteem by our words and
actions, which is called _cultus_, or _worship of God_. He therefore
that thinketh that all things proceed from God’s _eternal will_, and
consequently are _necessary_, does he not think God _omnipotent_?
Does he not esteem of his _power_ as highly as is possible? which is
to honour God as much as may be in his heart. Again, he that
thinketh so, is he not more apt by _external_ acts and words to
acknowledge it, than he that thinketh otherwise? yet is this
external acknowledgment the same thing which we call _worship_. So
that this opinion fortifies _piety_ in both kinds, external and
internal; therefore is far from destroying it. And for _repentance_,
which is nothing else but a glad returning into the right way, after
the grief of being out of the way; though the cause that made him go
astray were necessary, yet there is no reason why he should not
grieve; and, again though the cause why he returned into the way
were necessary, there remained still the causes of joy. So that the
_necessity_ of the actions taketh away neither of those parts of
_repentance_, grief for the error, and joy for returning.

And for _prayer_, whereas he saith that the _necessity_ of things
destroy _prayer_, I deny it; for though _prayer_ be none of the
_causes_ that _move_ God’s _will_, his will being unchangeable, yet
since we find in God’s word, he will not give his blessings but to
those that ask, the motive of prayer is the same. _Prayer_ is the
gift of God no less than the _blessing_, and the prayer is decreed
together in the same decree wherein the blessing is decreed. It is
manifest that _thanksgiving_ is no cause of the blessing past, and
that which is past is sure and necessary, yet even amongst men
thanks is in use as an acknowledgment of the benefit past, though we
should expect no new benefit for our gratitude. And prayer to God
Almighty is but thanksgiving for God’s blessings in general, and
though it precede the particular thing we ask, yet it is not a cause
or means of it, but a signification that we expect nothing but from
God, in such manner, as he, not as we, will; and our Saviour by word
of mouth bids us pray, _thy will_, not our will, _be done_, and by
example teaches us the same; for he prayed thus, _Father if it be
thy will, let this cup pass_, &c. The end of prayer, as of
thanksgiving, is not to _move_ but to _honour_ God Almighty, in
acknowledging that what we ask can be effected by him only.

_The fourth argument from reason is this: the order, beauty, and
perfection of the world requireth that in the universe should be
agents of all sorts; some necessary, some free, some contingent. He
that shall make all things necessary, or all things free, or all
things contingent, doth overthrow the beauty and perfection of the
world._

In which argument I observe, first a _contradiction_; for seeing he
that _maketh_ anything, in that he maketh it, maketh it to be
_necessary_; it followeth that he that maketh all things, maketh all
things necessarily to be: as if a workman make a garment, the
garment must necessarily be; so if God make every thing, every thing
must necessarily be. Perhaps the beauty of the world requireth,
though we know it not, that some agents should work without
deliberation (which his lordship calls _necessary_ agents) and some
agents with deliberation (and those both he and I call _free_
agents) and that some agents should work, and we not know how (and
their effects we both call _contingents_); but this hinders not but
that he that electeth may have his _election_ necessarily determined
to _one_ by _former_ causes, and that which is _contingent_, and
imputed to fortune, be nevertheless _necessary_ and depend on
_precedent_ necessary causes. For by _contingent_, men do not mean
that which hath _no_ cause, but that which hath not for cause
anything that we perceive; as for example, when a traveller meets
with a shower, the journey had a cause, and the rain had a cause
sufficient to produce it; but because the journey caused not the
rain, nor the rain the journey, we say they were contingent one to
another. And thus you see that though there be three sorts of
events, _necessary_, _contingent_, and _free_, yet they may be _all_
necessary without destruction of the beauty or perfection of the
universe.

To the first argument from reason, which is, _That if liberty be
taken away, the nature and formal reason of sin is taken away_; I
answer by denying the consequence: the nature of sin consisteth in
this, that the _action_ done proceed from our _will_ and be against
the _law_. A judge in judging whether it be sin or no, which is done
against the law, looks at no higher cause of the action, than the
will of the doer. Now when I say the action was _necessary_, I do
not say it was done _against_ the will of the doer, but _with_ his
will, and _necessarily_, because man’s will, that is every volition
or act of the will and purpose of man had a _sufficient_, and
therefore a _necessary_ cause, and consequently every _voluntary_
action was _necessitated_. An action therefore may be _voluntary_
and a _sin_, and nevertheless be _necessary_; and because God may
afflict by a right derived from his _omnipotence_, though sin were
not, and because the example of punishment on voluntary sinners, is
the cause that produceth justice, and maketh sin less frequent, for
God to punish such sinners, as I have said before, is no injustice.
And thus you have my answer to his Lordship’s objections both out of
Scripture, and from reason.


                                -------


         CERTAIN DISTINCTIONS, WHICH HIS LORDSHIP SUPPOSING
                   MIGHT BE BROUGHT TO EVADE HIS
                   ARGUMENTS, ARE BY HIM REMOVED.

He says a man may perhaps answer, that the _necessity_ of things
held by him, is not a _stoical_ necessity, but a _Christian_
necessity, &c. But this _distinction_ I have not used, nor indeed
ever heard before, nor could I think any man could make _stoical_
and _Christian_ two kinds of _necessity_, though they may be two
kinds of _doctrine_. Nor have I drawn my answer to his Lordship’s
arguments from the authority of any sect, but from the nature of the
things themselves.

But here I must take notice of certain words of his Lordship’s in
this place, as making against his own tenet. _Where all the causes_,
saith he, _being joined together, and subordinate one to another, do
make but one total cause, if any one cause, much more the first, in
the whole series or subordination of causes, be necessary, it
determines the rest, and without doubt maketh the effect necessary_.
For that which I call the _necessary_ cause of any effect, is the
_joining_ together of all causes subordinate to the first, into one
total cause. _If any of these_, saith he, _especially the first,
produce its effect necessarily, then all the rest_ are determined.
Now it is manifest, that the first cause is a necessary cause of all
the effects that are next and immediate to it, and therefore by his
Lordship’s own reason all effects are necessary.

Nor is that distinction of necessary in respect of the _first
cause_, and necessary in respect of _second causes_, mine; it does,
as his Lordship well notes, imply a contradiction. But the
distinction of _free_ into _free from compulsion_, and _free from
necessitation_, I acknowledge. For to be _free from compulsion_ is
to do a thing so as _terror_ be not the cause of his _will_ to do
it; for a man is then only said to be compelled, when fear makes him
willing to it: as when a man willingly throws his goods into the sea
to save himself, or submits to his enemy for fear of being killed.
Thus all men that do anything for _love_, or _revenge_, or _lust_,
are _free from compulsion_, and yet their actions may be as
necessary as those that are done by compulsion; for sometimes other
passions work as forcibly as fear. But _free from necessitation_, I
say, no man can be, and it is that which his Lordship undertook to
disprove.

This _distinction_, his Lordship says, uses to be _fortified_ by two
reasons, but they are not mine. The first he says, is, that it is
granted by all divines, that an _hypothetical necessity_, or
necessity upon supposition, may stand with _liberty_. That you may
understand this, I will give you an example of _hypothetical
necessity_. If _I shall live, I shall eat_. This is an _hypothetical
necessity_. Indeed it is a necessary proposition, that is to say, it
is necessary that that proposition should be true whensoever
uttered, but it is not the necessity of the thing, nor is it
therefore necessary that the man should live, nor that the man
should eat. I do not use to _fortify_ my distinctions with such
reasons; let his Lordship confute them how he will, it contents me;
but I would have your Lordship take notice hereby, how easy and
plain a thing, but withal false, with the grave usage of such terms
as _hypothetical necessity_, and _necessity_ upon _supposition_, and
such like terms of Schoolmen, may be obscured and made to seem
_profound learning_.

The second reason that may confirm the distinction of _free from
compulsion_, and _free from necessitation_, he says is, that God and
good angels do good necessarily, and yet are more free than we. This
reason, though I had no need of, yet I think it so far forth good,
as it is true that God and good angels do good necessarily, and yet
are free; but because I find not in the articles of our faith, nor
in the decrees of our church, set down in what manner I am to
conceive God and good angels to work by necessity, or in what sense
they work _freely_, I suspend my sentence in that point, and am
content that there be a _freedom from compulsion_, and yet no
_freedom from necessitation_, as hath been proved, in that a man may
be necessitated to some action without threats and without fear of
danger. But how my Lord can avoid the consisting together of
_freedom_ and _necessity_, supposing God and good angels are freer
than men, and yet do good necessarily, that we must examine: _I
confess_, saith he, _that God and good angels are more free than we,
that is, intensively in degree of freedom, not extensively in the
latitude of the object, according to a liberty of exercise not of
specification_.

Again, we have here two distinctions that are no distinctions, but
made to seem so by terms invented by I know not whom to cover
ignorance, and blind the understanding of the reader: for it cannot
be conceived that there is any liberty greater, than for a man to do
what he will. One heat may be more intensive than another, but not
one liberty than another; he that can do what he will, hath all
liberty possible, and he that cannot, hath none at all. Also
_liberty_, as his Lordship says the Schools call it, of _exercise_,
which is as I have said before, a liberty to do or not to do, cannot
be without a _liberty_, which they call, of _specification_, that is
to say, a liberty to do, or not to do this or that in particular.
For how can a man conceive he hath liberty to do anything, that hath
not liberty to do this, or that, or somewhat in particular? If a man
be forbidden in Lent to eat this, and that, and every other
particular kind of flesh, how can he be understood to have a liberty
to eat flesh, more than he that hath no licence at all? You may by
this again see the vanity of distinctions used in the _Schools_, and
I do not doubt but that the imposing of them, by authority of
_doctors_ in the _Church_, hath been a great cause that men have
laboured, though by sedition and evil courses, to shake them off;
for nothing is more apt to beget hatred, than the tyrannizing over
men’s reason and understanding, especially when it is done, not by
the Scriptures, but by the pretence of learning, and more judgment
than that of other men.

In the next place his Lordship bringeth two arguments against
distinguishing between _free from compulsion_ and _free from
necessitation_.

The first is, that _election_ is opposite not only to _coaction_ or
_compulsion_, but also _necessitation_ or determination to one. This
is it he was to prove from the beginning, and therefore bringeth no
new argument to prove it; and to those brought formerly, I have
already answered. And in this place I deny again, that election is
opposite to either; for when a man is compelled, for example, to
subject himself to an enemy or to die, he hath still election left
him, and a deliberation to bethink which of the two he can better
endure. And he that is led to prison by force, hath election, and
may deliberate whether he will be hauled and trained on the ground,
or make use of his own feet: likewise when there is no _compulsion_,
but the strength of _temptation_ to do an evil action, being greater
than the motives to _abstain_, it necessarily determines him to the
doing of it; yet he deliberates while sometimes the motives to do,
sometimes the motives to forbear, are working on him, and
consequently he _electeth_ which he will. But commonly when we see
and know the strength that moves us, we acknowledge _necessity_; but
when we see not, or mark not the force that moves us, we then think
there is none, and that it is not _causes_ but _liberty_ that
produceth the action. Hence it is that they think he does not choose
this, that of necessity chooses it; but they might as well say, fire
doth not burn, because it burns of necessity.

The second argument is not so much an argument as a distinction, to
show in what sense it may be said that _voluntary_ actions are
_necessitated_, and in what sense not. And therefore his Lordship
allegeth, as from the authority of the _Schools_, and that which
rippeth up the bottom of the _question_, that there is a double act
of the _will_. The one, he says, is _actus imperatus_, an act done
at the command of the will, by some inferior faculty of the soul; as
to open or shut one’s eyes; and this act may be compelled: the
other, he says, is _actus elicitus_, an act allured or drawn forth
by allurement out of the will, as to _will_, to _choose_, to
_elect_; this he says cannot be compelled. Wherein, letting pass
that metaphorical speech of attributing command and subjection to
the faculties of the soul, as if they made a commonwealth or family
within themselves, and could speak one to another, which is very
improper in searching the truth of a question, you may observe,
first, that to compel a _voluntary_ act, is nothing else but to will
it; for it is all one to say, my will commands the shutting of my
eyes, or the doing of any other action; and to say, I have the will
to shut my eyes: so that _actus imperatus_, here, might as easily
have been said in English a _voluntary action_, but that they that
invented the term, understood not anything it signified.

Secondly, you may observe, that _actus elicitus_, is exemplified by
these words, to _will_, to _elect_, to _choose_, which are all one,
and so to will is here made an act of the will; and indeed as the
will is a faculty or power in a man’s soul, so to will is an act of
it according to that power; but as it is absurdly said, that to
dance is an act allured or drawn by fair means out of the ability to
dance; so is it also to say, that to will is an act allured or drawn
out of the power to will, which power is commonly called the will.
Howsoever it be, the sum of his Lordship’s distinction is, that a
_voluntary_ act may be done by _compulsion_, that is to say, by foul
means, but to will that, or any act, cannot be but by _allurement_,
or fair means. Now seeing fair means, allurements, and enticements,
produce the action which they do produce, as _necessarily_ as foul
means and threatening; it follows, that to _will_ may be made as
_necessary_ as anything that is done by _compulsion_. So that
distinction of _actus imperatus_ and _actus elicitus_ are but words,
and of no effect against necessity.

His Lordship in the rest of his discourse, reckoneth up the opinion
of certain professions of men, touching the causes wherein the
necessity of things, which they maintain, consisteth. And first he
saith, the _astrologer_ deriveth his _necessity_ from the _stars_;
secondly, that the _physician_ attributeth it to the _temper_ of the
body. For my part, I am not of their opinion, because, neither the
stars alone, nor the temperature of the patient alone, is able to
produce any effect, without the concurrence of all other agents. For
there is hardly any one action, how casual soever it seem, to the
causing whereof concur not whatsoever is _in rerum naturâ_, which
because it is a great paradox, and depends on many antecedent
speculations, I do not press in this place. Thirdly, he disputeth
against the opinion of them that say, _external objects_ presented
to men of such and such temperatures, do make their actions
_necessary_; and says, the power such objections have over us,
proceeds from our own fault: but that is nothing to the purpose, if
such fault of ours proceedeth from causes not in our own power, and
therefore that opinion may hold true for all that answer.

Further he says, _prayer_, _fasting_, &c. may alter our _habits_;
it is true, but when they do so, they are _causes_ of the contrary
_habit_, and make it _necessary_, as the former habit had been
necessary, if _prayer_, _fasting_, &c. had not been. Besides, we
are not moved or disposed to prayer or any other action, but by
outward objects, as pious company, godly preachers, or something
equivalent. Fourthly, he says a resolved mind is not easily
surprised, as the mind of Ulysses, who when others wept, alone
wept not; and of the philosopher, that abstained from striking,
because he found himself angry; and of him that poured out the
water when he was thirsty, and the like. Such things I confess
have, or may have been done, and do prove only that it was not
necessary for Ulysses then to weep, nor for that philosopher to
strike, nor for that other man to drink; but it does not prove
that it was not necessary for Ulysses then to abstain, as he did,
from weeping, nor for the philosopher to abstain, as he did, from
striking, nor for the other man to forbear drinking, and yet that
was the thing his Lordship ought to have proved. Lastly his
Lordship confesses, that the _dispositions_ of objects may be
_dangerous_ to _liberty_, but cannot be _destructive_. To which I
answer, it is impossible: for _liberty_ is never in any other
danger than to be lost; and if it cannot be lost, which he
confesses, I may infer, it can be in no danger at all.

The fourth opinion his Lordship rejecteth, is of them that make the
will necessarily to follow the last dictate of the understanding;
but it seems his Lordship understands that tenet in another sense
than I do; for he speaketh as if they that held it, did suppose men
must dispute the sequel of every action they do, great and small, to
the least grain; which is a thing his Lordship, with reason, thinks
untrue. But I understand it to signify, that the _will_ follows the
_last_ opinion or _judgment_ immediately preceding the _action_,
concerning whether it be good to do it or not, whether he have
weighed it long before, or not at all, and that I take to be the
meaning of them that hold it. As for example, when a man strikes,
his will to strike follows necessarily that thought he had of the
sequel of his stroke, immediately before the lifting up of his hand.
Now if it be understood in that sense, the _last_ dictate of the
understanding does _necessitate_ the _action_, though not as the
whole cause, yet as the last cause, as the last feather necessitates
the breaking of a horse’s back, when there are so many laid on
before, as there needed but the addition of one to make the weight
sufficient.

That which his Lordship allegeth against this, is first, out of a
poet, who in the person of Medea says,

                     “Video meliora, proboque,
                     Deteriora sequor.”

But that saying, as pretty as it is, is not true; for though Medea
saw many reasons to forbear killing her children, yet the last
dictate of her judgment was, that the present revenge on her husband
outweighed them all, and thereupon the wicked action _necessarily_
followed. Then the story of the Roman, who of two competitors, said,
one had the better reason, but the other must have the office. This
also maketh against his Lordship, for the last dictate of his
judgment that had the bestowing of the office, was this, that it was
better to take a great bribe, than reward a great merit.

Thirdly, he objects that things nearer the sense, move more
powerfully than reason; what followeth thence but this, the sense of
the present good is commonly more immediate to the action, than the
foresight of the evil consequence to come? Fourthly, whereas his
Lordship says, that do what a man can, he shall sorrow more for the
death of his son than for the sin of his soul, makes nothing to the
last dictate of the understanding; but it argues plainly, that
sorrow for sin is not _voluntary_, and by consequence, that
_repentance_ proceedeth from causes.

The last part of this discourse containeth his Lordship’s opinions
about reconciling _liberty_ with the _prescience_ and _decrees_ of
God, otherwise than some _divines_ have done, against whom, he says,
he had formerly written a treatise, out of which he repeateth only
two things: one is, _That we ought not to desert a certain truth,
for not being able to comprehend the certain manner of it_. And I
say the same, as for example, that his Lordship ought not to desert
this certain truth, _that there are certain and_ necessary causes
_which make every man to_ will _what he willeth, though he do not_
yet conceive in what manner the _will_ of man is _caused_. And yet I
think the manner of it is not very hard to conceive, seeing we see
daily, that _praise_, _dispraise_, _reward_, and _punishment_,
_good_ and _evil_, sequels of men’s _actions_ retained in _memory_,
do frame and make us to the _election_ of whatsoever it be that we
elect, and that the memory of such things proceeds from the
_senses_, and _sense_ from the operation of the objects of sense,
which are external to us, and governed only by God Almighty; and by
consequence all _actions_, even of _free_ and _voluntary_ agents,
are necessary.

The other thing that he repeateth, is, that the best way to
reconcile _contingence_ and _liberty_ with _prescience_ and the
_decrees_ of _God_, is to subject future _contingencies_ to the
_aspect of God_. The same is also my opinion, but contrary to what
his Lordship all this while laboured to prove. For hitherto he held
_liberty_ and _necessity_, that is to say, _liberty_ and the
_decrees_ of _God_, irreconcileable, unless the _aspect of God_,
which word appeareth now the first time in this discourse, signify
somewhat else besides _God’s will_ and _decree_, which I cannot
understand. But he adds that we must subject them, according to that
_presentiality_ which they have in eternity, which he says cannot be
done by them that conceive _eternity_ to be an _everlasting
succession_, but only by them that conceive it as an _indivisible
point_. To which I answer, that as soon as I can conceive _eternity_
to be an _indivisible point_, or anything but an _everlasting
succession_, I will renounce all that I have written on this
subject. I know St. Thomas Aquinas calls _eternity_, _nunc stans_,
an _ever-abiding now_; which is easy enough to say, but though I
fain would, yet I could never conceive it: they that can, are more
happy than I. But in the mean time his Lordship alloweth all men to
be of my opinion, save only those that can conceive in their minds a
_nunc stans_, which I think are none. I understand as little how it
can be true his Lordship says, that God is not _just_, but _justice_
itself; not _wise_, but _wisdom_ itself; not _eternal_, but
_eternity_ itself; nor how he concludes thence, that _eternity_ is a
_point indivisible_, and not a _succession_, nor in what sense it
can be said, that an _infinite point_, and wherein is no
_succession_, can comprehend all _time_, though time be
_successive_. These phrases I find not in the Scripture; I wonder
therefore what was the design of the Schoolmen to bring them up,
unless they thought a man could not be a true Christian unless his
understanding be first strangled with such hard sayings. And thus
much for answer to his Lordship’s discourse, wherein I think not
only his _squadrons of arguments_, but also his _reserve of
distinctions_, are defeated. And now your Lordship shall have my
doctrine concerning the same question, with my _reasons_ for it,
positively, and as briefly as I can, without any terms of _art_, in
plain English.


                MY OPINION ABOUT LIBERTY AND NECESSITY.


First I conceive, that when it cometh into a man’s mind to do or not
to do some certain action, if he have no time to _deliberate_, the
doing it or abstaining _necessarily_ follow the _present_ thought he
hath of the _good_ or _evil_ consequence thereof to himself. As for
example, in sudden _anger_, the _action_ shall follow the thought of
_revenge_; in sudden _fear_, the thought of _escape_. Also when a
man hath time to _deliberate_, but deliberates not, because never
anything appeared that could make him doubt of the consequence, the
_action_ follows his opinion of the _goodness_ or _harm_ of it.
These actions I call VOLUNTARY, my Lord, if I understand him aright
that calls them SPONTANEOUS. I call them _voluntary_, because those
_actions_ that follow immediately the _last_ appetite, are
_voluntary_, and here where is one only appetite, that one is the
last. Besides, I see it is reasonable to punish a _rash_ action,
which could not be justly done by man to man, unless the same were
_voluntary_. For no _action_ of a man can be said to be without
_deliberation_, though never so sudden, because it is supposed he
had time to _deliberate_ all the precedent time of his life, whether
he should do that kind of action or not. And hence it is, that he
that killeth in a sudden passion of _anger_, shall nevertheless be
justly put to _death_, because all the time, wherein he was able to
consider whether to kill were good or evil, shall be held for one
continual _deliberation_, and consequently the killing shall be
judged to proceed from _election_.

Secondly, I conceive when a man _deliberates_ whether he shall do a
thing or not do it, that he does nothing else but consider whether
it be better for himself to do it or not to do it. And to _consider_
an action, is to imagine the _consequences_ of it, both _good_ and
_evil_. From whence is to be inferred, that _deliberation_ is
nothing else but _alternate_ imagination of the _good_ and _evil_
sequels of an _action_, or, which is the same thing, alternate
_hope_ and _fear_, or alternate _appetite_ to do or quit the action
of which he _deliberateth_.

Thirdly, I conceive that in all _deliberations_, that is to say, in
all alternate _succession_ of contrary _appetites_, the last is that
which we call the WILL, and is immediately next before the doing of
the action, or next before the doing of it become impossible. All
other _appetites_ to do, and to quit, that come upon a man during
his deliberations, are called _intentions_ and _inclinations_, but
not _wills_, there being but one _will_, which also in this case may
be called the _last will_, though the _intentions_ change often.

Fourthly, I conceive that those _actions_, which a man is said to do
upon _deliberation_, are said to be _voluntary_, and done upon
_choice_ and _election_, so that _voluntary_ action, and action
proceeding from _election_ is the same thing; and that of a
_voluntary agent_, it is all one to say, he is _free_, and to say,
he hath not made an end of _deliberating_.

Fifthly, I conceive _liberty_ to be rightly defined in this manner:
_Liberty is the absence of all the impediments to action that are
not contained in the nature and intrinsical quality of the agent_.
As for example, the water is said to descend _freely_, or to have
_liberty_ to descend by the channel of the river, because there is
no impediment that way, but not across, because the banks are
impediments. And though the water cannot ascend, yet men never say
it wants the _liberty_ to ascend, but the _faculty_ or _power_,
because the impediment is in the nature of the water, and
intrinsical. So also we say, he that is tied, wants the _liberty_ to
go, because the impediment is not in him, but in his bands; whereas
we say not so of him that is sick or lame, because the impediment is
in himself.

Sixthly, I conceive that nothing taketh beginning from _itself_, but
from the _action_ of some other immediate _agent_ without itself.
And that therefore, when first a man hath an _appetite_ or _will_ to
something, to which immediately before he had no appetite nor will,
the _cause_ of his _will_, is not the _will_ itself, but _something_
else not in his own disposing. So that whereas it is out of
controversy, that of _voluntary_ actions the _will_ is the
_necessary_ cause, and by this which is said, the _will_ is also
_caused_ by other things whereof it disposeth not, it followeth,
that _voluntary_ actions have all of them _necessary_ causes, and
therefore are _necessitated_.

Seventhly, I hold that to be a _sufficient cause_, to which nothing
is wanting that is needful to the producing of the _effect_. The
same also is a _necessary_ cause. For if it be possible that a
_sufficient_ cause shall not bring forth the _effect_, then there
wanteth somewhat which was needful to the producing of it, and so
the _cause_ was not _sufficient_; but if it be impossible that a
_sufficient_ cause should not produce the _effect_, then is a
_sufficient_ cause a _necessary_ cause, for that is said to produce
an effect _necessarily_ that cannot but produce it. Hence it is
manifest, that whatsoever is produced, is produced _necessarily_;
for whatsoever is produced hath had a _sufficient_ cause to produce
it, or else it had not been; and therefore also _voluntary_ actions
are _necessitated_.

Lastly, that ordinary _definition_ of a _free agent_, namely, _that
a_ free agent _is that, which, when all things are present which are
needful to produce the_ effect, _can nevertheless not produce it_,
implies a contradiction, and is nonsense; being as much as to say,
the cause may be _sufficient_, that is to say, _necessary_, and yet
the _effect_ shall not follow.


                                -------


                              MY REASONS.

For the first five points, wherein it is explicated I, what
_spontaneity_ is; II, what _deliberation_ is; III, what _will_,
_propension_, and _appetite_ are; IV, what a _free agent_ is: V,
what _liberty_ is; there can no other proof be offered but every
man’s own experience, by reflection on himself, and remembering what
he useth in his mind, that is, what he himself meaneth when he saith
an action is _spontaneous_, a man _deliberates_; such is his _will_,
that _agent_ or that _action_ is _free_. Now he that reflecteth so
on himself, cannot but be satisfied, that _deliberation_ is the
_consideration of the good and evil sequels of an action to come_;
that by _spontaneity_ is meant _inconsiderate action_, or else
nothing is meant by it; that _will_ is the _last act of our
deliberation_; that a _free agent_ is he _that can do if he will_,
and _forbear if he will_; and that _liberty is the absence of
external impediments_. But to those that out of custom speak not
what they conceive, but what they hear, and are not able, or will
not take the pains to consider what they think when they hear such
words, no argument can be sufficient, because _experience_ and
_matter of fact_ are not verified by other men’s arguments, but by
every man’s own _sense_ and _memory_. For example, how can it be
proved that to _love_ a thing and to think it _good_ is all one, to
a man that doth not mark his own meaning by those words? Or how can
it be proved that _eternity_ is not _nunc stans_, to a man that says
those words by custom, and never considers how he can conceive the
thing in his mind?

Also the sixth point, that a man cannot imagine anything to begin
_without a cause_, can no other way be made known, but by trying how
he can imagine it; but if he try, he shall find as much reason, if
there be no cause of the thing, to conceive it should begin at one
time as another, that he hath equal reason to think it should begin
at all times, which is impossible, and therefore he must think there
was some special cause why it began then, rather than sooner or
later; or else that it began never, but was _eternal_.

For the seventh point, which is, that all _events_ have _necessary_
causes, it is there proved, in that they have _sufficient_ causes.
Further let us in this place also suppose any event never so casual,
as the throwing, for example, _ames ace_ upon a pair of dice, and
see, if it must not have been _necessary_ before it was thrown. For
seeing it was thrown, it had a _beginning_, and consequently a
_sufficient_ cause to produce it, consisting partly in the _dice_,
partly in outward things, as the posture of the parts of the _hand_,
the measure of _force_ applied by the caster, the posture of the
parts of the _table_, and the like. In sum, there was nothing
wanting which was necessarily requisite to the producing of that
particular cast, and consequently the cast was necessarily thrown;
for if it had not been thrown, there had wanted somewhat requisite
to the throwing of it, and so the cause had not been _sufficient_.
In the like manner it may be proved that every other accident, how
_contingent_ soever it seem, or how _voluntary_ soever it be, is
produced _necessarily_, which is that that my Lord Bishop disputes
against. The same may be proved also in this manner. Let the case be
put, for example, of the weather. _It is necessary that to-morrow it
shall rain or not rain._ If therefore it be not _necessary_ it shall
rain, it is _necessary_ it shall not rain, otherwise there is no
necessity that the proposition, _it shall rain or not rain_, should
be true. I know there be some that say, it may necessarily be true
that one of the two shall come to pass, but not, singly that it
shall rain, or that it shall not rain, which is as much to say,
_one_ of them is _necessary_, yet neither of them is _necessary_;
and therefore to seem to avoid that absurdity, they make a
distinction, that neither of them is true _determinate_, but
_indeterminate_; which distinction either signifies no more but
this, one of them is true, but we know not which, and so the
necessity remains, though we know it not; or if the meaning of the
distinction be not that, it hath no meaning, and they might as well
have said, one of them is true _Titirice_, but neither of them, _Tu
patulice_.

The last thing, in which also consisteth the whole controversy,
namely that there is no such thing as an agent, _which when all
things requisite to action are present, can nevertheless forbear to
produce it_; or, which is all one, that there is no such thing as
_freedom from necessity_, is easily inferred from that which hath
been before alleged. For if it be an _agent_, it can _work_; and if
it _work_, there is nothing wanting of what is requisite to produce
the _action_, and consequently the cause of the action is
_sufficient_; and if _sufficient_, then also _necessary_, as hath
been proved before.

And thus you see how the _inconveniences_, which his Lordship
objecteth must follow upon the holding of _necessity_, are avoided,
and the _necessity_ itself _demonstratively_ proved. To which I
could add, if I thought it good logic, the _inconvenience_ of
denying _necessity_, as that it destroyeth both the _decrees_ and
the _prescience_ of God Almighty; for whatsoever God hath _purposed_
to bring to pass by _man_, as an instrument, or foreseeth shall come
to pass; a man, if he have _liberty_, such as his Lordship
affirmeth, from _necessitation_, might frustrate, and make not to
come to pass, and God should either not _foreknow_ it, and not
_decree_ it, or he should _foreknow_ such things shall be, as shall
never be, and _decree_ that which shall never _come to pass_.

This is all that hath come into my mind touching this question since
I last considered it. And I humbly beseech your Lordship to
communicate it only to my Lord Bishop. And so praying God to prosper
your Lordship in all your designs, I take leave, and am,

                      My most noble and most obliging Lord,
                                           Your most humble servant,
                                                THOMAS HOBBES.

Rouen, _Aug. 20, 1652_.[A]

Footnote A:

  In the first edition of 1654 this date is 1646.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                   AN
                                 ANSWER
                         TO A BOOK PUBLISHED BY
                             DR. BRAMHALL,

                       LATE BISHOP OF DERRY;

                             CALLED THE

                    “CATCHING OF THE LEVIATHAN.”


                          TOGETHER WITH AN

                  HISTORICAL NARRATION CONCERNING

                              HERESY,

                    AND THE PUNISHMENT THEREOF.

                             TO THE READER.


                                -------


As in all things which I have written, so also in this piece, I have
endeavoured all I can to be perspicuous; but yet your own attention
is always necessary. The late Lord Bishop of Derry published a book
called _The Catching of the Leviathan_, in which he hath put
together divers sentences picked out of my _Leviathan_, which stand
there plainly and firmly proved, and sets them down without their
proofs, and without the order of their dependance one upon another;
and calls them atheism, blasphemy, impiety, subversion of religion,
and by other names of that kind. My request unto you is, that when
he cites my words for erroneous, you will be pleased to turn to the
place itself, and see whether they be well proved, and how to be
understood. Which labour his Lordship might have saved you, if he
would have vouchsafed as well to have weighed my arguments before
you, as to have shown you my conclusions. His book containeth two
chapters, the one concerning Religion, the other concerning
Politics. Because he does not so much as offer any refutation of any
thing in my _Leviathan_ concluded, I needed not to have answered
either of them. Yet to the first I here answer, because the words
_atheism_, _impiety_, and the like, are words of the greatest
defamation possible. And this I had done sooner, if I had sooner
known that such a book was extant. He wrote it ten years since, and
yet I never heard of it till about three months since; so little
talk there was of his Lordship’s writings. If you want leisure or
care of the questions between us, I pray you condemn me not upon
report. To judge and not examine is not just.

                                            Farewell.
                                                          T. HOBBES.


                                -------


                             AN ANSWER,
                                ETC.


                                -------


  THAT THE HOBBIAN PRINCIPLES ARE DESTRUCTIVE TO CHRISTIANITY AND ALL
                               RELIGION.

_J. D._ The image of God is not altogether defaced by the fall of
man, but that there will remain some practical notions of God and
goodness; which when the mind is free from vagrant desires, and
violent passions, do shine as clearly in the heart, as other
speculative notions do in the head. Hence it is, that there was
never any nation so barbarous or savage throughout the whole world,
which had not their God. They who did never wear clothes upon their
backs, who did never know magistrate but their father, yet have
their God, and their religious rights and devotions to him. Hence it
is, that the greatest atheists in any sudden danger do unwittingly
cast their eyes up to heaven, as craving aid from thence, and in a
thunder creep into some hole to hide themselves. And they who are
conscious to themselves of any secret crimes, though they be secure
enough from the justice of men, do yet feel the blind blows of a
guilty conscience, and fear Divine vengeance. This is acknowledged
by T. H. himself in his lucid intervals. _That we may know what
worship of God natural reason doth assign, let us begin with his
attributes, where it is manifest in the first place, that existency
is to be attributed to him._ To which he addeth, _infiniteness_,
_incomprehensibility_, _unity_, _ubiquity_. Thus for attributes;
next for actions. _Concerning external actions, wherewith God is to
be worshipped, the most general precept of reason is, that they be
signs of honour_; under which are contained _prayers, thanksgivings,
oblations, and sacrifices_.

_T. H._ Hitherto his Lordship discharges me of atheism. What need he
to say that _all nations, how barbarous soever, yet have their Gods
and religious rites, and atheists are frighted with thunder, and
feel the blind blows of conscience_? It might have been as apt a
preface to any other of his discourses as this. I expect therefore
in the next place to be told, that I deny again my afore-recited
doctrine.

_J. D._ Yet, to let us see how inconsistent and irreconcileable he
is with himself, elsewhere reckoning up all the laws of nature at
large, even twenty in number, he hath not one word that concerneth
religion, or hath the least relation in the world to God. As if a
man were like the colt of a wild ass in the wilderness, without any
owner or obligation. Thus in describing the laws of nature, this
great clerk forgetteth the God of nature, and the main and principal
laws of nature, which contain a man’s duty to his God, and the
principal end of his creation.

_T. H._ After I had ended the discourse he mentions of the laws of
nature, I thought it fittest in the last place, once for all, to say
they were the laws of God, then when they were delivered in the word
of God; but before, being not known by men for any thing but their
own natural reason, they were but theorems, tending to peace, and
those uncertain, as being but conclusions of particular men, and
therefore not properly laws. Besides, I had formerly in my book _De
Cive_, cap. IV, proved them severally, one by one, out of the
Scriptures: which his Lordship had read and knew. It was therefore
an unjust charge of his to say, I had not one word in them that
concerns religion, or that hath the least relation in the world to
God; and this upon no other ground than that I added not to every
article, _this law is in the Scripture_. But why he should call me
(ironically) a great clerk, I cannot tell. I suppose he would make
men believe, I arrogated to myself all the learning of a great
clerk, bishop, or other inferior minister. A learned bishop, is that
bishop that can interpret all parts of Scripture truly, and
congruently to the harmony of the whole; that has learnt the history
and laws of the Church, down from the apostles' time to his own; and
knows what is the nature of a law civil, divine, natural, and
positive; and how to govern well the parochial ministers of his
diocese, so that they may both by doctrine and example keep the
people in the belief of all articles of faith necessary to
salvation, and in obedience to the laws of their country. This is a
learned bishop. A learned minister, is he that hath learned the way
by which men may be drawn from avarice, pride, sensuality,
profaneness, rebellious principles, and all other vices, by eloquent
and powerful disgracing of them, both from Scripture and from
reason; and can terrify men from vice, by discreet uttering of the
punishments denounced against wicked men, and by deducing,
rationally, the damage they receive by it in the end. In one word,
he is a learned minister that can preach such sermons as St.
Chrysostom preached to the Antiochians, when he was presbyter in
that city. Could his Lordship find in my book, that I arrogated to
myself the eloquence or wisdom of St. Chrysostom, or the ability of
governing the church? It is one thing to know what is to be done,
another thing to know how to do it. But his Lordship was pleased to
use any artifice to disgrace me in any kind whatsoever.

_J. D._ Perhaps he will say that he handleth the laws of nature
there, only so far as may serve to the constitution or settlement of
a commonwealth. In good time, let it be so. He hath devised us a
trim commonwealth, which is founded neither upon religion towards
God, nor justice towards man; but merely upon self-interest, and
self-preservation. Those rays of heavenly light, those natural seeds
of religion, which God himself hath imprinted in the heart of man,
are more efficacious towards preservation of a society, whether we
regard the nature of the thing, or the blessing of God, than all his
_pacts_, and _surrenders_, and _translations of power_. He who
unteacheth men their duty to God, may make them eye-servants, so
long as their interest doth oblige them to obey; but is no fit
master to teach men conscience and fidelity.

_T. H._ He has not yet found the place where I contradict either the
existence, or infiniteness, or incomprehensibility, or unity, or
ubiquity of God. I am therefore yet absolved of atheism. But I am,
he says, inconsistent and irreconcileable with myself; that is, I am
(though he says not so) he thinks, a forgetful blockhead. I cannot
help that: but my forgetfulness appears not here. Even his Lordship,
where he says, “those rays of heavenly light, those seeds of
religion, which God himself hath imprinted in the heart of man
(meaning natural reason), are more efficacious to the preservation
of society, than all the _pacts, surrenders_, and _translating of
power_,” had forgotten to except the old pact of the Jews, and the
new pact of Christians. But pardoning that, did he hope to make any
wise man believe, that when this nation very lately was an anarchy,
and dissolute multitude of men, doing every one what his own reason
or imprinted light suggested, they did again out of the same light
call in the king, and peace again, and ask pardon for the faults,
which that their illumination had brought them into, rather than out
of fear of perpetual danger and hope of preservation?

_J. D._ Without religion, societies are like but soapy bubbles,
quickly dissolved. It was the judgment of as wise a man as T. H.
himself, though perhaps he will hardly be persuaded to it, that Rome
owed more of its grandeur to religion, than either to strength or
stratagems. _We have not exceeded the Spaniards in number, nor the
Gauls in strength, nor the Carthaginians in craft, nor the Grecians
in art, &c. but we have overcome all nations by our piety and
religion._

_T. H._ Did not his Lordship forget himself here again, in approving
this sentence of Tully, which makes the idolatry of the Romans, not
only better than the idolatry of other nations; but also better than
the religion of the Jews, whose law Christ himself says he came not
to destroy but to fulfil? And that the Romans overcame both them and
other nations by their piety, when it is manifest that the Romans
overran the world by injustice and cruelty, and that their victories
ought not to be ascribed to the piety of the Romans, but to the
impiety as well of the Jews as of other nations? But what meant he
by saying “Tully was as wise a man as T. H. himself, though perhaps
he will hardly be persuaded to it?” Was that any part of the
controversy? No: then it was out of his way. God promiseth to assist
good men in their way, but not out of their way. It is therefore the
less wonder that his Lordship was in this place deserted of the
light, which God imprints in the hearts of rudest savages.

_J. D._ Among his laws he inserteth _gratitude_ to men as the third
precept of the law of nature; but of the gratitude of mankind to
their Creator, there is a deep silence. If men had sprung up from
the earth in a night, like mushrooms or excrescences, without all
sense of honour, justice, conscience, or gratitude, he could not
have vilified the human nature more than he doth.

_T. H._ My Lord discovers here an ignorance of such method as is
necessary for lawful and strict reasoning, and explication of the
truth in controversy. And not only that, but also how little able he
is to fix his mind upon what he reads in other men’s writings. When
I had defined ingratitude universally, he finds fault that I do not
mention ingratitude towards God, as if his Lordship knew not that an
universal comprehends all the particulars. When I had defined equity
universally, why did he not as well blame me for not telling what
that equity is in God? He is grateful to the man of whom he receives
a good turn, that confesseth, or maketh appear he is pleased with
the benefit he receiveth. So also gratitude towards God is to
confess his benefits. There is also, in gratitude towards men, a
desire to requite their benefits; so there is in our gratitude
towards God, so far to requite them, as to be kind to God’s
ministers, which I acknowledged in making sacrifices a part of
natural divine worship; and the benefit of those sacrifices is the
nourishment of God’s ministers. It appears therefore, that the
bishop’s attention in reading my writings, was either weak in
itself, or weakened by prejudice.

_J. D._ From this shameful omission or preterition of the main duty
of mankind, a man might easily take the height of T. H. his
religion. But he himself putteth it past all conjectures. His
principles are brim full of prodigious impiety. _In these four
things, opinions of ghosts, ignorance of second causes, devotion to
what men fear, and taking of things casual for prognostics,
consisteth the natural seed of religion_; the culture and
improvement whereof, he referreth only to _policy_. Human and divine
politics, are but politics. And again, _mankind hath this from the
conscience of their own weakness, and the admiration of natural
events, that the most part of men believe that there is an invisible
God, the maker of all visible things_. And a little after he telleth
us, that _superstition proceedeth from fear without right reason,
and atheism from an opinion of reason without fear_; making atheism
to be more reasonable than superstition. What is now become of that
divine worship which natural reason did assign unto God, the honour
of existence, infiniteness, incomprehensibility, unity, ubiquity?
What is now become of that dictate or precept of reason, concerning
_prayers_, _thanksgivings_, _oblations_, _sacrifices_, if uncertain
opinions, ignorance, fear, mistakes, the conscience of our own
weakness, and the admiration of natural events, be the only seeds of
religion?

He proceedeth further, that _atheism itself, though it be an
erroneous opinion, and therefore a sin, yet it ought to be numbered
among the sins of imprudence or ignorance_. He addeth, that _an
atheist is punished not as a subject is punished by his king,
because he did not observe laws: but as an enemy, by an enemy,
because he would not accept laws_. His reason is, because _the
atheist never submitted his will to the will of God, whom he never
thought to be_. And he concludeth that man’s obligation to obey God
proceedeth from his weakness, (De Cive, XV. 7: vol. II. p. 336):
_Manifestum est obligationem ad prestandam ipsi_ (Deo) _obedientiam,
incumbere hominibus propter imbecilitatem_. First, it is impossible
that should be a sin of mere ignorance or imprudence, which is
directly contrary to the light of natural reason. The laws of nature
need no new promulgation, being imprinted naturally by God in the
heart of man. _The law of nature was written in our hearts by the
finger of God, without our assent_; or rather, _the law of nature is
the assent itself_. Then if nature dictate to us that there is a
God, and that this God is to be worshipped in such and such a
manner, it is not possible that atheism should be a sin of mere
ignorance.

Secondly, a rebellious subject is still a subject _de jure_, though
not _de facto_; by right, though not by deed: and so the most cursed
atheist that is, ought by right to be the subject of God, and ought
to be punished not as a just enemy, but as a disloyal traitor. Which
is confessed by himself: _this fourth sin_ (that is, of those who do
not by word and deed confess one God, the supreme King of Kings) _in
the natural kingdom of God is the crime of high treason, for it is a
denial of Divine power, or atheism_. Then an atheist is a traitor to
God, and punishable as a disloyal subject, not as an enemy.

Lastly, it is an absurd and dishonourable assertion, to make our
obedience to God to depend upon our weakness, because we cannot help
it, and not upon our gratitude, because we owe our being and
preservation to him. _Who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the
fruit thereof? And who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk
of the flock?_ And again, _Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
glory, and honour and power; for thou hast created all things, and
for thy pleasure they are and were created_. But it were much
better, or at least not so ill, to be a downright atheist, than to
make God to be such a thing as he doth, and at last thrust him into
the Devil’s office, to be the cause of all sin.

_T. H._ Though this bishop, as I said, had but a weak attention in
reading, and little skill in examining the force of an argument, yet
he knew men, and the art, without troubling their judgments, to win
their assents by exciting their passions. One rule of his art was to
give his reader what he would have him swallow, a part by itself,
and in the nature of news, whether true or not. Knowing that the
unlearned, that is most men, are content to believe, rather than be
troubled with examining, therefore, a little before, he put these
words, _T. H. no friend to religion_, in the margin. And in this
place, before he offer at any confutation, he says my principles are
brim full of _prodigious impieties_. And at the next paragraph, in
the margin, he puts that _I excuse atheism_. This behaviour becomes
neither a bishop, nor a Christian, nor any man that pretends to good
education. Fear of invisible powers, what is it else in savage
people, but the fear of somewhat they think a God? What invisible
power does the reason of a savage man suggest unto him, but those
phantasms of his sleep, or his distemper, which we frequently call
ghosts, and the savages thought gods; so that the fear of a God,
though not of the true one, to them was the beginning of religion,
as the fear of the true God was the beginning of wisdom to the Jews
and Christians? Ignorance of second causes made men fly to some
first cause, the fear of which bred devotion and worship. The
ignorance of what that power might do, made them observe the order
of what he had done; that they might guess by the like order, what
he was to do another time. This was their prognostication. What
prodigious impiety is here? How confutes he it? Must it be taken for
impiety upon his bare calumny? I said superstition was fear without
reason. Is not the fear of a false God, or fancied demon, contrary
to right reason? And is not atheism boldness grounded on false
reasoning, such as is this, _the wicked prosper, therefore there is
no God_? He offers no proof against any of this; but says only I
make atheism to be more reasonable than superstition; which is not
true: for I deny that there is any reason either in the atheist or
in the superstitious. And because the atheist thinks he has reason,
where he has none, I think him the more irrational of the two. But
all this while he argues not against any of this; but enquires only,
what is become of my natural worship of God, and of his existency;
infiniteness, incomprehensibility, unity, and ubiquity. As if
whatsoever reason can suggest, must be suggested all at once. First,
all men by nature had an opinion of God’s existency; but of his
other attributes not so soon, but by reasoning, and by degrees. And
for the attributes of the true God, they were never suggested but by
the Word of God written. In that I say atheism is a sin of
ignorance, he says I excuse it. The prophet David says, _the fool
hath said in his heart, there is no God_. Is it not then a sin of
folly? It is agreed between us, that right reason dictates, there is
a God. Does it not follow, that denying of God is a sin proceeding
from misreasoning. If it be not a sin of ignorance, it must be a sin
of malice. Can a man malice that which he thinks has no being? But
may not one think there is a God, and yet maliciously deny him? If
he think there is a God, he is no atheist; and so the question is
changed into this, whether any man that thinks there is a God, dares
deliberately deny it? For my part I think not. For upon what
confidence dares any man, deliberately I say, oppose the Omnipotent?
David saith of himself, _My feet were ready to slip when I saw the
prosperity of the wicked_. Therefore it is likely the feet of men
less holy slip oftener. But I think no man living is so daring,
being out of passion, as to hold it as his opinion. Those wicked men
that for a long time proceeded so successfully in the late horrid
rebellion, may perhaps make some think they were constant and
resolved atheists: but I think rather that they forgot God, than
believed there was none. He that believes there is such an atheist,
comes a little too near that opinion himself; nevertheless if words
spoken in passion signify a denial of a God, no punishment
preordained by law, can be too great for such an insolence; because
there is no living in a commonwealth with men, to whose oaths we
cannot reasonably give credit. As to that I say, _an atheist is
punished by God not as a subject by his king, but as an enemy_; and
to my argument for it, namely, _because he never acknowledged
himself God’s subject_, he opposeth, that if nature dictate that
there is a God, and to be worshipped in such and such manner, then
atheism is not a sin of mere ignorance: as if either I or he did
hold that nature dictates the manner of God’s worship, or any
article of our creed, or whether to worship with or without a
surplice. Secondly, he answers that a rebel is still a subject _de
jure_, though not _de facto_: and it is granted. But though the king
lose none of his right by the traitor’s act, yet the traitor loseth
the privilege of being punished by a precedent law; and therefore
may be punished at the king’s will, as Ravaillac was for murdering
Henry IV of France. An open enemy and a perfidious traitor are both
enemies. Had not his Lordship read in the Roman story, how Perseus
and other just enemies of that state were wont to be punished? But
what is this trifling question to my _excusing of atheism_? In the
seventh paragraph of chapter XV. of my book _De Cive_, he found the
words in Latin, which he here citeth. And to the same sense I have
said in my _Leviathan_, that the right of nature whereby God
reigneth over men, is to be derived not from his creating them, as
if he required obedience, as of gratitude; but from his irresistible
power. This he says is absurd and dishonourable. Whereas first all
power is honourable, and the greatest power is most honourable. Is
it not a more noble tenure for a king to hold his kingdom, and the
right to punish those that transgress his laws, from his power, than
from the gratitude or gift of the transgressor. There is nothing
therefore here of dishonour to God Almighty. But see the subtilty of
his disputing. He saw he could not catch _Leviathan_ in this place,
he looks for him in my book _De Cive_, which is Latin, to try what
he could fish out of that: and says I make our obedience to God,
depend upon our weakness; as if these words signified the
_dependence_, and not the _necessity_ of our submission, or that
_incumbere_ and _dependere_ were all one.

_J. D._ For T. H. his God is not the God of Christians, nor of any
rational men. Our God is every where, and seeing he hath no parts,
he must be wholly here, and wholly there, and wholly every where.
So nature itself dictateth. _It cannot be said honourably of God
that he is in a place; for nothing is in a place, but that which
hath proper bounds of its greatness._ But T. H. his God is not
wholly every where. _No man can conceive that any thing is all in
this place, and all in another place at the same time, for none of
these things ever have or can be incident to sense._ So far well,
if by _conceiving_ he mean _comprehending_; but then follows,
_That these are absurd speeches taken upon credit, without any
signification at all, from deceived philosophers, and deceived or
deceiving Schoolmen_. Thus he denieth the ubiquity of God. A
_circumscriptive_, a definitive, and a repletive being in a place,
is some heathen language to him.

_T. H._ Though I believe the omnipotence of God, and that he can do
what he will, yet I dare not say how every thing is done, because I
cannot conceive nor comprehend either the Divine substance, or the
way of its operation. And I think it impiety to speak concerning God
any thing of my own head, or upon the authority of philosophers or
Schoolmen, which I understand not, without warrant in the Scripture:
and what I say of omnipotence, I say also of ubiquity. But his
Lordship is more valiant in this place, telling us that God is
_wholly here_, and _wholly there_, and _wholly every where_; because
he has no parts. I cannot comprehend nor conceive this. For methinks
it implies also that the whole world is also in the whole God, and
in every part of God. Nor can I conceive how any thing can be called
_whole_, which has no parts, nor can I find anything of this in the
Scripture. If I could find it there, I could believe it; and if I
could find it in the public doctrine of the Church, I could easily
abstain from contradicting it. The Schoolmen say also, that the soul
of man (meaning his upper soul, which they call the rational soul)
is also _wholly_ in _the whole man_, and _wholly_ in _every part_ of
the man. What is this, but to make the human soul the same thing in
respect of man’s body, that God is in respect of the world? These
his Lordship calls here rational men, and some of them which applaud
this doctrine, would have the high court of parliament corroborate
such doctrines with a law. I said in my _Leviathan_, that it is no
honourable attribute to God, to say he is _in a place_, because
infinite is not confined within a place. To which he replies, _T. H.
his God is not wholly every where_. I confess the consequence. For I
understand in _English_, he that says any thing to be _all here_,
means that _neither all nor any of the same thing is elsewhere_. He
says further, I take a _circumscriptive, a definitive, and a
repletive_ being in a place to be heathen language. Truly, if this
dispute were at the bar, I should go near to crave the assistance of
the court, lest some trick might be put upon me in such obscurity.
For though I know what these Latin words singly signify, yet I
understand not how any thing is in a _place definitively_ and not
_circumscriptively_. For _definitively_ comes from _definio_, which
is to set bounds. And therefore to be in a place definitively, is
when the bounds of the _place_ are every way marked out. But to be
in a place circumscriptively, is when the bounds of the place are
described round about. To be in a place repletively, is to fill a
place. Who does not see that this distinction is canting and fraud?
If any man will call it pious fraud, he is to prove the piety as
clearly as I have here explained the fraud. Besides, no fraud can be
pious in any man, but him that hath a lawful right to govern him
whom he beguileth; whom the Bishop pretends to govern, I cannot
tell. Besides, his Lordship ought to have considered, that every
Bishop is one of the great Council, trusted by the King to give
their advice with the Lords temporal, for the making of good laws,
civil and ecclesiastical, and not to offer them such obscure
doctrines, as if, because they are not versed in School-divinity,
therefore they had no learning at all, nor understood the English
tongue. Why did the divines of England contend so much heretofore to
have the Bible translated into English, if they never meant any but
themselves should read it? If a lay-man be publicly encouraged to
search the Scriptures for his own salvation, what has a divine to do
to impose upon him any strange interpretation, unless, if he make
him err to damnation, he will be damned in his stead?

_J. D._ Our God is immutable without any shadow of turning by
change, to whom all things are present, nothing past, nothing to
come. But T. H. his God is measured by time, losing something that
is past, and acquiring something that doth come every minute. That
is as much as to say, that our God is infinite, and his God is
finite; for unto that which is actually infinite, nothing can be
added, neither time nor parts. Hear himself: _Nor do I understand
what derogation it can be to the Divine perfection, to attribute to
it potentiality, that is in English, power_ (so little doth he
understand what potentiality is) _and successive duration_. And he
chargeth it upon us as a fault, that we will not have eternity to be
an _endless succession of time_. How, _successive duration, and an
endless succession of time in God_? Then God is not infinite, then
God is older to-day than he was yesterday. Away with blasphemies!
Before, he destroyed the ubiquity of God, and now he destroyeth his
eternity.

_T. H._ I shall omit both here and henceforth his preambulatory,
impertinent, and uncivil calumnies. The thing he pretends to prove
is this. That it is a derogation to the Divine power to attribute to
it potentiality (that is in English power) and successive duration.
One of his reasons is, God is infinite, and nothing can be added to
infinite, neither of time nor of parts: it is true. And therefore I
said, God is infinite and eternal, without beginning or end, either
of time or place; which he has not here confuted, but confirmed. He
denies potentiality and power to be all one, and says I little
understand what potentiality is. He ought therefore in this place to
have defined what potentiality is: for I understand it to be the
same with _potentia_, which is in English power. There is no such
word as potentiality in the Scriptures, nor in any author of the
Latin tongue. It is found only in School-divinity, as a word of art,
or rather as a word of craft, to amaze and puzzle the laity. And
therefore I no sooner read than interpreted it. In the next place he
says, as wondering: _How, an endless succession of time in God_! Why
not? _God’s mercy endureth for ever_, and surely God endureth as
long as his mercy; therefore there is duration in God, and
consequently endless succession of time. _God who in sundry times
and divers manners spake in time past_, &c. But in a former dispute
with me about free-will, he hath defined eternity to be _nunc
stans_, that is an _ever standing now_, or _everlasting instant_.
This he thinks himself bound in honour to defend. What reasonable
soul can digest this? We read in Scripture, that a thousand years
with God, is but as yesterday. And why? but because he sees as
clearly to the end of a thousand years, as to the end of a day. But
his Lordship affirms, that both a thousand years and a day are but
one instant, the same _standing now_, or eternity. If he had showed
an holy text for this doctrine, or any text of the book of _Common
Prayer_ (in the Scripture and book of _Common Prayer_ is contained
all our religion), I had yielded to him; but School-divinity I value
little or nothing at all. Though in this he contradict also the
School-men, who say the soul is eternal only _a parte post_, but God
is eternal both _a parte post_, and _a parte ante_. Thus there are
parts in eternity; and eternity being, as his Lordship says, the
Divine substance, the Divine substance has parts, and _nunc stans_
has parts. Is not this darkness? I take it to be the kingdom of
darkness, and the teachers of it (especially of this doctrine, that
God, who is not only _optimus_, but also _maximus_, is no greater
than to be wholly contained in the least atom of earth, or other
body, and that his whole duration is but an instant of time) to be
either grossly ignorant or ungodly deceivers.

_J. D._ Our God is a perfect, pure, simple, indivisible, infinite
essence; free from all composition of matter and form, of
substance and accidents. All matter is finite, and he who acteth
by his infinite essence, needeth neither organs nor faculties (_id
est_, _no power, note that_), nor accidents, to render him more
complete. But T. H. his God is a divisible God, a compounded God,
that hath matter, or qualities, or accidents. Hear himself. I
argue thus: _The Divine substance is indivisible; but eternity is
the Divine substance. The major is evident, because God is_ actus
simplicissimus; _the minor is confessed by all men, that
whatsoever is attributed to God, is God_. Now listen to his
answer: _The major is so far from being evident, that_ actus
simplicissimus _signifieth nothing. The minor is said by some men,
thought by no man; whatsoever is thought is understood._ The major
was this, _the Divine substance is indivisible_. Is this far from
being evident? Either it is indivisible, or divisible. If it be
not indivisible, then it is divisible, then it is materiate, then
it is corporeal, then it hath parts, then it is finite by his own
confession. _Habere partes, aut esse totum aliquid, sunt attributa
finitorum._ Upon this silly conceit he chargeth me for saying,
that _God is not just_, but justice itself; not eternal, but
eternity itself; which he calleth _unseemly words to be said of
God_. And he thinketh he doth me a great courtesy in not adding
_blasphemous and atheistical_. But his bolts are so soon shot, and
his reasons are such vain imaginations, and such drowsy
phantasies, that no sober man doth much regard them. Thus he hath
already destroyed the ubiquity, the eternity, and the simplicity
of God. I wish he had considered better with himself, before he
had desperately cast himself upon these rocks.

But _paulo majora canamus_. My next charge is, that he destroys the
very being of God, and leaves nothing in his place, but an empty
name. For by taking away all incorporeal substances, he taketh away
God himself. The very name, saith he, of an incorporeal substance,
is a _contradiction_. And _to say that an angel or spirit, is an
incorporeal substance, is to say in effect, that there is no angel
or spirit at all_. By the same reason to say, that God is an
incorporeal substance, is to say there is no God at all. Either God
is incorporeal; or he is finite, and consists of parts, and
consequently is no God. This, that there is no incorporeal spirit,
is that main root of atheism, from which so many lesser branches are
daily sprouting up.

_T. H._ God is indeed a perfect, pure, simple, infinite substance;
and his name incommunicable, that is to say, not divisible into this
and that individual God, in such manner as the name of man is
divisible into Peter and John. And therefore God is individual;
which word amongst the Greeks is expressed by the word indivisible.
Certain heretics in the primitive church, because special and
individual are called particulars, maintained that Christ was a
particular God, differing in number from God the Father. And this
was the doctrine that was condemned for heresy in the first council
of Nice, by these words, _God hath no parts_. And yet many of the
Latin fathers, in their explications of the Nicene creed, have
expounded the word _consubstantial_, by the community of
nature, which different species have in their genus, and
different individuals in the species; as if Peter and John were
_consubstantial_, because they agree in one human nature; which is
contrary, I confess, to the meaning of the Nice fathers. But that in
a substance infinitely great, it should be impossible to consider
any thing as not infinite, I do not see it there condemned. For
certainly he that thinks God is in every part of the church, does
not exclude him out of the churchyard. And is not this a considering
of him by parts? For dividing a thing which we cannot reach nor
separate one part thereof from another, is nothing else but
considering of the same by parts. So much concerning indivisibility
from natural reason; for I will wade no further, but rely upon the
Scriptures. God is nowhere said in the Scriptures to be indivisible,
unless his Lordship meant division to consist only in separation of
parts, which I think he did not. St. Paul indeed saith (1 Cor. i.
13): _Is Christ divided?_ Not that the followers of Paul, Apollos,
and Cephas, followed some one part, some another of Christ; but that
thinking differently of his nature, they made as it were different
kinds of him. Secondly, his Lordship expounds simplicity, by not
being compounded of matter and form, or of substance and accidents,
unlearnedly. For nothing can be so compounded. The matter of a
_chair_ is _wood_; the form is the figure it hath, apt for the
intended use. Does his Lordship think the chair compounded of the
wood and the figure? A man is rational: does it therefore follow
that reason is a part of the man? It was Aristotle deceived him, who
told him that _a rational living creature_, is the definition of a
man, and that the definition of a man was his essence; and therefore
the Bishop and other Schoolmen, from this that the word rational is
a part of these words, _man is a rational living creature_,
concluded that the essence of man was a part of the man, and a
_rational man_ the same thing with a rational soul. I should wonder
how any man, much more a doctor of divinity, should be so grossly
deceived, but that I know naturally the generality of men speak the
words of their masters by rote, without having any ideas of the
things, which the words signify. Lastly, he calls God an _essence_.
If he mean by _essence_ the same with _ens_, τὸ ὄν, I approve it.
Otherwise, what is _essence_? There is no such word in the Old
Testament. The Hebrew language, which has no word answerable to the
copulative _est_, will not bear it. The New Testament hath οὐσία,
but never for _essence_, nor for _substance_, but only for riches. I
come now to his argument in mood and figure, which is this, _the
Divine substance is indivisible_. That is the _major_. _Eternity is
the Divine substance._ That is the _minor_. _Ergo_, the Divine
substance is indivisible. The major, he says, is evident, because
God is _actus simplicissimus_. The minor is confessed, he thinks, by
all men, because whatsoever is attributed to God, is God. To this I
answered, that the major was so far from being evident, that _actus
simplicissimus_ signifieth nothing, and that the minor was
understood by no man. First, what is _actus_ in the _major_? Does
any man understand _actus_ for a substance, that is, for a thing
subsisting by itself? Is not _actus_, in English, either an _act_ or
an _action_, or nothing? Or is any of these _substance_? If it be
evident, why did he not explain _actus_ by a definition? And as to
the minor, though all men in the world understand that the _Eternal_
is God, yet no man can understand that the _eternity_ is God.
Perhaps he and the Schoolmen mean by _actus_, the same that they do
by _essentia_. What is the _essence_ of a _man_, but his _humanity_;
or of God, but his _Deity_; of _great_, but _greatness_; and so of
all other denominating attributes? And the words, God and Deity, are
of different signification. John Damascene, a father of the church,
expounding the Nicene creed, denies plainly that the Deity was
incarnate; but all true Christians hold that God was incarnate.
Therefore God and the Deity signify divers things; and therefore
_eternal_ and _eternity_ are not the same, no more than a wise man
and his wisdom are the same; nor God and his justice the same thing:
and universally it is false, that the attribute in the abstract is
the same with the substance, to which it is attributed. Also it is
universally true of God, that the attribute in the concrete, and the
substance to which it is attributed, is not the same thing.

I come now to his next period or paragraph, wherein he would fain
prove, that by denying incorporeal substance, I take away God’s
existence. The words he cites here are mine: _to say an angel or
spirit is an incorporeal substance, is to say in effect there is no
angel nor spirit at all_. It is true also, that to say that God is
an incorporeal substance, is to say in effect there is no God at
all. What alleges he against it, but the School-divinity which I
have already answered? Scripture he can bring none, because the word
incorporeal is not found in Scripture. But the Bishop, trusting to
his Aristotelian and Scholastic learning, hath hitherto made no use
of Scripture, save only of these texts: 1 Cor. ix. 7: _Who hath
planted a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof; or who
feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock?_ and Rev.
iv. 11: _Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, honour, and
power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they
were created_: thereby to prove that the right of God to govern and
punish mankind is not derived from his omnipotence. Let us now see
how he proves incorporeity by his own reason without Scripture.
_Either God_, he saith, _is incorporeal or finite_. He knows I deny
both, and say he is _corporeal_ and _infinite_: against which he
offers no proof, but only, according to his custom of disputing,
calls it the root of atheism; and interrogates me, what real thing
is left in the world, if God be incorporeal, but body and accidents?
I say there is nothing left but corporeal substance. For I have
denied, as he knew, that there is any reality in accidents; and
nevertheless maintain God’s existence, and that he is a most pure,
and most simple corporeal spirit. Here his Lordship catching
nothing, removes to the eternity of the Trinity, which these my
grounds, he says, destroy. How so? I say the Trinity, and the
persons thereof, are that one pure, simple, and eternal corporeal
spirit; and why does this destroy the Trinity, more than if I had
called it incorporeal? He labours here and seeketh somewhat to
refresh himself in the word _person_; _by the same grounds_, he
saith, _every king hath as many persons as there be justices of
peace in his kingdom, and God Almighty hath as many persons as there
be kings_. Why not? For I never said that all those kings were that
God; and yet God giveth that name to the kings of the earth. For the
signification of the word _person_, I shall expound it by and by in
another place. Here ends his Lordship’s School-argument; now let me
come with my Scripture-argument. St. Paul, concerning Christ (Col.
ii. 9) saith thus: _In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily_. This place Athanasius, a great and zealous doctor in the
Nicene Council, and vehement enemy of Arius the heretic, who allowed
Christ to be no otherwise God, than as men of excellent piety were
so called, expoundeth thus: _The fulness of the Godhead dwelleth in
him bodily_, (Greek σωματικῶς), _id est_ θεϊκῶς, _id est, realiter_.
So there is one Father for corporality, and that God was in Christ
in such manner as body is in body. Again, there were in the
primitive church a sort of heretics who maintained that Jesus Christ
had not a true real body, but was only a phantasm or spright, such
as the Latins call _spectra_. Against the head of this sect, whose
name I think was Apelles, Tertullian wrote a book, now extant
amongst his other works, intituled _De Carne Christi_; wherein after
he had spoken of the nature of phantasms, and showed that they had
nothing of reality in them, he concludeth with these words,
“whatsoever is not _body_, is _nothing_.” So here is on my side a
plain text of Scripture, and two ancient and learned Fathers. Nor
was this doctrine of Tertullian condemned in the Council of Nice;
but the division of the divine substance into God the Father, God
the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. For these words, _God has no
parts_, were added, for explication of the word _consubstantial_, at
the request of the dissenting Fathers, and are further explained
both in Athanasius his creed, in these words, _not three Gods but
one God_, and by the constant attribute ever since of the
_individual_ Trinity. The same words nevertheless do condemn the
Anthropomorphites also; for though there appeared no Christians that
professed that God had an organical body, and consequently that the
persons were three individuals, yet the Gentiles were all
Anthropomorphites, and there condemned by these words, _God has no
parts_.

And thus I have answered his accusation concerning the eternity and
existence of the Divine substance, and made it appear that in truth,
the question between us, is whether God be a phantasm (_id est_, an
idol of the fancy, which St. Paul saith is nothing) or a corporeal
spirit, that is to say, something that has magnitude.

In this place I think it not amiss, leaving for a little while this
theological dispute, to examine the signification of those words
which have occasioned so much diversity of opinion in this kind of
doctrine.

The word _substance_, in Greek ὑπόστασις, ὑποσταν, ὑποσταμενον,
signify the same thing, namely, a ground, a base, any thing that has
existence or subsistence _in itself_, anything that upholdeth that
which else would fall, in which sense God is properly the
hypostasis, base, and substance that upholdeth all the world, having
subsistence not only _in himself_, but _from himself_; whereas other
substances have their subsistence only in themselves, not from
themselves. But metaphorically, faith is called (Heb. xi. 1) a
substance, because it is the foundation or base of our hope; for
faith failing, our hope falls. And (2 Cor. ix. 4) St. Paul having
boasted of the liberal promise of the Corinthians towards the
Macedonians, calls that promise the ground, the hypostasis of that
his boasting. And (Heb. i. 3) Christ is called the image of the
substance (the hypostasis) of his Father, and for the proper and
adequate signification of the word hypostasis, the Greek Fathers did
always oppose it to apparition or phantasm; as when a man seeth his
face in the water, his real face is called the hypostasis of the
phantastic face in the water. So also in speaking, the thing
understood or named is called hypostasis, in respect of the name; so
also a body coloured is the hypostasis, substance and subject of the
colour; and in like manner of all its other accidents. Essence and
all other abstract names, are words artificial belonging to the art
of logic, and signify only the manner how we consider the substance
itself. And of this I have spoken sufficiently in my _Leviathan_
(vol. III. page 672). _Body_ (Latin, _corpus_, σῶμα) is that
substance which hath magnitude indeterminate, and is the same with
corporeal substance; but _a body_ is that which hath magnitude
determinate, and consequently is understood to be _totum_ or
_integrum aliquid_. _Pure_ and _simple body_, is body of one and the
same kind, in every part throughout; and if mingled with body of
another kind, though the total be compounded or mixed, the parts
nevertheless retain their simplicity, as when water and wine are
mixed, the parts of both kinds retain their simplicity. For water
and wine can not both be in one and the same place at once.

_Matter_ is the same with _body_; but never without respect to a
body which is made thereof. _Form_ is the aggregate of all accidents
together, for which we give the matter a new name; so _albedo_,
_whiteness_, is the form of _album_, or _white body_. So also
humanity is the essence of man, and Deity the essence of Deus.

Spirit is thin, fluid, transparent, invisible body. The word in
Latin signifies breath, air, wind, and the like. In Greek πνεῡμα
from πνέω, _spiro_, _flo_.

I have seen, and so have many more, two waters, one of the river,
the other a mineral water, so like that no man could discern the one
from the other by his sight; yet when they have been both put
together, the whole substance could not by the eye be distinguished
from milk. Yet we know that the one was not mixed with the other, so
as every part of the one to be in every part of the other, for that
is impossible, unless two bodies can be in the same place. How then
could the change be made in every part, but only by the activity of
the mineral water, changing it every where to the sense, and yet not
being every where, and in every part of the water? If then such
gross bodies have so great activity, what shall we think of spirits,
whose kinds be as many as there be kinds of liquor, and activity
greater? Can it then be doubted, but that God, who is an infinitely
fine Spirit, and withal intelligent, can make and change all species
and kinds of body as he pleaseth? But I dare not say, that this is
the way by which God Almighty worketh, because it is past my
apprehension: yet it serves very well to demonstrate, that the
omnipotence of God implieth no contradiction; and is better than by
pretence of magnifying the fineness of the Divine substance, to
reduce it to a spright or phantasm, which is nothing.

A _person_ (Latin, _persona_) signifies an intelligent substance,
that acteth any thing in his own or another’s name, or by his own or
another’s authority. Of this definition there can be no other proof
than from the use of that word, in such Latin authors as were
esteemed the most skilful in their own language, of which number was
Cicero. But Cicero, in an epistle to Atticus, saith thus: _Unus
sustineo tres personas, mei, adversarii, et judicis_: that is, “I
that am but one man, sustain three persons; mine own person, the
person of my adversary, and the person of the judge.” Cicero was
here the substance intelligent, one man; and because he pleaded for
himself, he calls himself his own person: and again, because he
pleaded for his adversary, he says, he sustained the person of his
adversary: and lastly, because he himself gave the sentence, he
says, he sustained the person of the judge. In the same sense we use
the word in English vulgarly, calling him that acteth by his own
authority, his own person, and him that acteth by the authority of
another, the person of that other. And thus we have the exact
meaning of the word _person_. The Greek tongue cannot render it; for
πρὸσωπον is properly a face, and, metaphorically, a vizard of an
actor upon the stage. How then did the Greek Fathers render the word
_person_, as it is in the blessed Trinity? Not well. Instead of the
word _person_ they put _hypostasis_, which signifies substance; from
whence it might be inferred, that the three persons in the Trinity
are three Divine substances, that is, three Gods. The word πρὸσωπον
they could not use, because face and vizard are neither of them
honourable attributes of God, nor explicative of the meaning of the
Greek church. Therefore the Latin (and consequently the English)
church, renders _hypostasis_ every where in Athanasius his creed by
_person_. But the word _hypostatical union_ is rightly retained and
used by divines, as being the union of two hypostases, that is, of
two substances or natures in the person of Christ. But seeing they
also hold the soul of our Saviour to be a substance, which, though
separated from his body, subsisted nevertheless in itself, and
consequently, before it was separated from his body upon the cross,
was a distinct nature from his body, how will they avoid this
objection, that then Christ had three natures, three hypostases,
without granting, that _his resurrection was a new vivification, and
not a return of his soul out of Heaven into the grave_? The contrary
is not determined by the church. Thus far in explication of the
words that occur in this controversy. Now I return again to his
Lordship’s discourse.

_J. D._ When they have taken away all incorporeal spirits, what do
they leave God himself to be? He who is the fountain of all being,
from whom and in whom all creatures have their being, must needs
have a real being of his own. And what real being can God have among
bodies and accidents? For they have left nothing else in the
universe. Then T. H. may move the same question of God, which he did
of devils. _I would gladly know in what classes of entities, the
Bishop ranketh God?_ Infinite being and participated being are not
of the same nature. Yet to speak according to human apprehension,
(apprehension and comprehension differ much: T. H. confesseth that
natural reason doth dictate to us, that God is infinite, yet natural
reason cannot comprehend the infiniteness of God) I place him among
incorporeal substances or spirits, because he hath been pleased to
place himself in that rank, _God is a Spirit_. Of which place T. H.
giveth his opinion, that it is unintelligible, and all others of the
same nature, _and fall not under human understanding_.

They who deny all incorporeal substances, can understand nothing by
God, but either nature, (not _naturam naturantem_, that is, a real
author of nature, but _naturam naturatam_, that is, the orderly
concourse of natural causes, as T. H. seemeth to intimate,) or a
fiction of the brain, without real being, cherished for advantage
and politic ends, as a profitable error, howsoever dignified with
the glorious title of _the eternal cause of all things_.

_T. H._ To his Lordship’s question here: _What I leave God to be?_
I answer, I leave him to be a most pure, simple, invisible spirit
corporeal. By corporeal I mean a substance that has magnitude, and
so mean all learned men, divines and others, though perhaps there
be some common people so rude as to call nothing body, but what
they can see and feel. To his second question: _What real being He
can have amongst bodies and accidents?_ I answer, the being of a
spirit, not of a spright. If I should ask any the most subtile
distinguisher, what middle nature there were between an infinitely
subtile substance, and a mere thought or phantasm, by what name
could he call it? He might call it perhaps an incorporeal
substance; and so _incorporeal_ shall pass for a middle nature
between _infinitely subtile_ and _nothing_, and be less subtile
than infinitely subtile, and yet more subtile than a thought. It
is granted, he says, that the nature of God is incomprehensible.
Doth it therefore follow, that we may give to the Divine substance
what negative name we please? Because he says, the whole Divine
substance is here and there and every where throughout the world,
and that the soul of a man is here and there and every where
throughout man’s body; must we therefore take it for a mystery of
Christian religion, upon his or any other Schoolman’s word,
without the Scripture, which calls nothing a mystery but the
incarnation of the eternal God? Or is incorporeal a mystery, when
not at all mentioned in the Bible, but to the contrary it is
written, _That the fulness of the Deity was bodily in Christ_?
When the nature of the thing is incomprehensible, I can acquiesce
in the Scripture: but when the signification of words is
incomprehensible, I cannot acquiesce in the authority of a
Schoolman.

_J. D._ We have seen what his principles are concerning the Deity,
they are full as bad or worse concerning the Trinity. Hear himself:
_A person is he that is represented as often as he is represented.
And therefore God who has been represented, that is personated
thrice, may properly enough be said to be three persons, though
neither the word Person nor Trinity be ascribed to him in the
Bible._ And a little after: _To conclude, the doctrine of the
Trinity, as far as can be gathered directly from the Scripture, is
in substance this, that the God who is always one and the same, was
the person represented by Moses, the person represented by his Son
incarnate, and the person represented by the apostles. As
represented by the apostles, the holy spirit by which they spake is
God. As represented by his Son, that was God and man, the Son is
that God. As represented by Moses and the High-priests, the Father,
that is to say, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is that God.
From whence we may gather the reason why those names, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, in the signification of the Godhead, are never used
in the Old Testament. For they are persons, that is, they have their
names from representing, which could not be till divers persons had
represented God, in ruling or in directing under him._

Who is so bold as blind Bayard? The emblem of a little boy
attempting to lade all the water out of the sea with a cockle-shell,
doth fit T. H. as exactly as if it had been shaped for him, who
thinketh to measure the profound and inscrutable mysteries of
religion, by his own silly, shallow conceits. What is now become of
the great adorable mystery of the blessed undivided Trinity? It is
shrunk into nothing. Upon his grounds there was a time when there
was no Trinity: and we must blot these words out of our creed, _the
Father eternal, the Son eternal, and the Holy Ghost eternal_: and
these other words out of our Bibles, _Let us make man after our
image_: unless we mean that this was a consultation of God with
Moses and the apostles. What is now become of the eternal generation
of the Son of God, if this sonship did not begin until about four
thousand years after the creation were expired? Upon these grounds
every king hath as many _persons_, as there be justices of peace and
petty constables in his kingdom. Upon this account God Almighty hath
as many _persons_, as there have been sovereign princes in the world
since Adam. According to this reckoning each one of us, like so many
Geryons, may have as many _persons_ as we please to make
procurations. Such bold presumption requireth another manner of
confutation.

_T. H._ As for the words recited, I confess there is a fault in the
ratiocination, which nevertheless his Lordship hath not discovered,
but no impiety. All that he objecteth is, that it followeth
hereupon, that there be as many persons of a king, as there be petty
constables in his kingdom. And so there are, or else he cannot be
obeyed. But I never said that a king, and every one of his persons,
are the same substance. The fault I here made, and saw not, was
this; I was to prove that it is no contradiction, as Lucian and
heathen scoffers would have it, to say of God, he was one and three.
I saw the true definition of the word _person_ would serve my turn
in this manner; God, in his own person, both created the world, and
instituted a church in Israel, using therein the ministry of Moses:
the same God, in the person of his Son God and man, redeemed the
same world, and the same church; the same God, in the person of the
Holy Ghost, sanctified the same church, and all the faithful men in
the world. Is not this a clear proof that it is no contradiction to
say that God is three persons and one substance? And doth not the
church distinguish the persons in the same manner? See the words of
our catechism. Question. _What dost thou chiefly learn in these
articles of thy belief?_ Answer. _First, I learn to believe in God
the Father, that hath made me and all the world; Secondly, in God
the Son, who hath redeemed me and all mankind; Thirdly, in God the
Holy Ghost, that hath sanctified me and all the elect people of
God._ But at what time was the church sanctified? Was it not on the
day of Pentecost, in the descending of the Holy Ghost upon the
apostles? His Lordship all this while hath catched nothing. It is I
that catched myself, for saying, instead of _by the ministry of
Moses_, in the person of Moses. But this error I no sooner saw, than
I no less publicly corrected than I had committed it, in my
_Leviathan_ converted into Latin, which by this time I think is
printed beyond the seas with this alteration, and also with the
omission of some such passages as strangers are not concerned in.
And I had corrected this error sooner, if I had sooner found it. For
though I was told by Dr. Cosins, now Bishop of Durham, that the
place above-cited was not applicable enough to the doctrine of the
Trinity, yet I could not in reviewing the same espy the defect, till
of late, when being solicited from beyond sea, to translate the book
into Latin, and fearing some other man might do it not to my liking,
I examined this passage and others of the like sense more narrowly.
But how concludes his Lordship out of this, that I put out of the
creed these words, _the Father eternal, the Son eternal, the Holy
Ghost eternal_? Or these words, _let us make man after our image_,
out of the Bible? Which last words neither I nor Bellarmine put out
of the Bible, but we both put them out of the number of good
arguments to prove the Trinity; for it is no unusual thing in the
Hebrew, as may be seen by Bellarmine’s quotations, to join a noun of
the plural number with a verb of the singular. And we may say also
of many other texts of Scripture alleged to prove the Trinity, that
they are not so firm as that high article requireth. But mark his
Lordship’s Scholastic charity in the last words of this period:
_such bold presumption requireth another manner of confutation_.
This bishop, and others of his opinion, had been in their element,
if they had been bishops in Queen Mary’s time.

_J. D._ Concerning God the Son, forgetting what he had said
elsewhere, where he calleth him _God and man_, and _the Son of God
incarnate_, he doubteth not to say, that _the word_ hypostatical _is
canting_. As if the same person could be both God and man without a
personal, that is, an hypostatical union of the two natures of God
and man.

_T. H._ If Christian profession be (as certainly it is in England) a
law; and if it be of the nature of a law to be made known to all men
that are to obey it, in such manner as they may have no excuse for
disobedience from their ignorance; then, without doubt, all words
unknown to the people, and as to them insignificant, are canting.
The word _substance_ is understood by the vulgar well enough, when
it is said of a body, but in other sense not at all, except for
their riches. But the word _hypostatical_ is understood only by
those, and but few of those that are learned in the Greek tongue,
and is properly used, as I have said before, of the union of the two
natures of Christ in one person. So likewise _consubstantial_ in the
Nicene creed, is properly said of the Trinity. But to an Englishman
that understands neither Greek nor Latin, and yet is as much
concerned as his Lordship was, the word _hypostatical_ is no less
canting than _eternal now_.

_J. D._ He alloweth every man who is commanded by his lawful
sovereign, _to deny Christ with his tongue before men_.

_T. H._ I allow it in some cases, and to some men, which his
Lordship knew well enough, but would not mention. I alleged for it,
in the place cited, both reason and Scripture, though his Lordship
thought it not expedient to take notice of either. If it be true
that I have said, why does he blame it? If false, why offers he no
argument against it, neither from Scripture nor from reason? Or why
does he not show that the text I cite is not applicable to the
question, or not well interpreted by me? First, he barely cites it,
because he thought the words would sound harshly, and make a reader
admire them for impiety. But I hope I shall so well instruct my
reader ere I leave this place, that this his petty art will have no
effect. Secondly, the cause why he omitted my arguments was, that he
could not answer them. Lastly, the cause why he urgeth neither
Scripture nor reason against it was, that he saw none sufficient. My
argument from Scripture was this, (_Leviathan_, vol. III. p. 493)
taken out of 2 Kings v. 17-19, where Naaman the Syrian saith to
Elisha the prophet: _Thy servant will henceforth offer neither
burnt-offering nor sacrifice to other Gods, but unto the Lord. In
this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when my master goeth
into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my
hand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon: when I bow myself in
the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing. And
he said unto him, Go in peace._ What can be said to this? Did not
Elisha say it from God? Or is not this answer of the prophet a
permission? When St. Paul and St. Peter commanded the Christians of
their time to obey their princes, which then were heathens and
enemies of Christ, did they mean they should lose their lives for
disobedience? Did they not rather mean they should preserve both
their lives and their faith, believing in Christ as they did, by
this denial of the tongue, having no command to the contrary? If in
this kingdom a Mahometan should be made by terror to deny Mahomet
and go to church with us, would any man condemn this Mahometan? A
denial with the mouth may perhaps be prejudicial to the power of the
church; but to retain the faith of Christ stedfastly in his heart,
cannot be prejudicial to his soul that hath undertaken no charge to
preach to wolves, whom they know will destroy them. About the time
of the Council of Nice, there was a canon made (which is extant in
the history of the Nicene Council) concerning those that being
Christians had been seduced, not terrified, to a denial of Christ,
and again repenting, desired to be readmitted into the church; in
which canon it was ordained, that those men should be no otherwise
readmitted than to be in the number of the cathechised, and not to
be admitted to the communion till a great many years' penitence.
Surely the church then would have been more merciful to them that
did the same upon terror of present death and torments.

Let us now see what his Lordship might, though but colourably, have
alleged from Scripture against it. There be three places only that
seem to favour his Lordship’s opinion. The first is where Peter
denied Christ, and weepeth. The second is, Acts v. 29: _Then Peter
and the other Apostles answered and said, we ought to obey God
rather than men_. The third is, Luke xii. 9: _But he that denieth me
before men, shall be denied before the angels of God_.

For answer to these texts, I must repeat what what I have written,
and his Lordship read in my _Leviathan_, p. 656. _For an unlearned
man that is in the power of an idolatrous king, or state, if
commanded on pain of death to worship before an idol, doing it, he
detesteth the idol in his heart, he doth well; though if he had the
fortitude to suffer death, rather than worship it, he should do
better. But if a pastor, who, as Christ’s messenger, has undertaken
to teach Christ’s doctrine to all nations, should do the same, it
were not only a sinful scandal in respect of other Christian men’s
consciences, but a perfidious forsaking of his charge._ In which
words I distinguish between a pastor and one of the sheep of his
flock. St. Peter sinned in denying Christ; and so does every pastor,
that denieth Christ, having undertaken the charge of preaching the
gospel in the kingdom of an infidel, where he could expect at the
undertaking of his charge no less than death. And why, but because
he violates his trust in doing contrary to his commission. St. Peter
was an apostle of Christ, and bound by his voluntary undertaking of
that office not only to confess Christ, but also to preach him
before those infidels who, he knew, would like wolves devour him.
And therefore, when Paul and the rest of the apostles were forbidden
to preach Christ, they gave this answer, _We ought to obey God
rather than men_. And it was to his disciples only which had
undertaken that office, that Christ saith, _he that denieth me
before men, shall be denied before the angels of God_. And so I
think I have sufficiently answered this place, and showed that I do
not allow the denying of Christ, upon any colour of torments, to his
Lordship, nor to any other that has undertaken the office of a
preacher. Which if he think right, he will perhaps in this case put
himself into the number of those whom he calls merciful doctors:
whereas now he extends his severity beyond the bounds of common
equity. He has read Cicero, and perhaps this story in him. The
senate of Rome would have sent Cicero to treat of peace with Marcus
Antonius; but when Cicero had showed them the just fear he had of
being killed by him, he was excused; and if they had forced him to
it, and he by terror turned enemy to them, he had in equity been
excusable. But his Lordship, I believe, did write this more
valiantly than he would have acted it.

_J. D._ He deposeth Christ from his true kingly office, making his
_kingdom not to commence or begin before the day of judgment_. And
_the regimen, wherewith Christ governeth his faithful in this life,
is not properly a kingdom, but a pastoral office, or a right to
teach_. And a little after, _Christ had not kingly authority
committed to him by his Father in this world, but only consiliary
and doctrinal_.

_T. H._ How do I take away Christ’s kingly office? He neither draws
it by consequence from my words, nor offers any argument at all
against my doctrine. The words he cites are in the contents of chap.
XVII. De Cive (vol. II). In the body of the chapter it is thus: _The
time of Christ’s being upon the earth is called, in Scripture, the
regeneration often, but the kingdom never. When the Son of God comes
in majesty, and all the angels with him, then he shall sit on the
seat of majesty. My kingdom is not of this world. God sent not his
Son that he should judge the world. I came not to judge the world,
but to save the world. Man, who made me a judge or divider amongst
you? Let thy kingdom come._ And other words to the same purpose. Out
of which it is clear that Christ took upon him no regal power upon
earth before his assumption. But at his assumption his Apostles
asked him if he would then restore the kingdom to Israel, and he
answered, it was not for them to know. So that hitherto Christ had
not taken that office upon him, unless his Lordship think that the
kingdom of God, and the kingdom of Christ, be two distinct kingdoms.
From the Assumption ever since, all true Christians say daily in
their prayers, _Thy kingdom come_. But his Lordship had perhaps
forgot that. But when then beginneth Christ to be a king? I say it
shall be then, when he comes again in majesty with all the angels.
And even then he shall reign (as he is man) under his Father. For
St. Paul saith (1 Cor. xv. 25, 26): _He must reign till he hath put
all enemies under his feet; the last enemy that shall be destroyed,
is death_. But when shall God the Father reign again? St. Paul saith
in the same chapter, verse 28: _When all things shall be subdued
unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that
put all things under him, that God may be all in all_. And verse 24:
_Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to
God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule,
authority, and power_. This is at the resurrection. And by this it
is manifest, that his Lordship was not so well versed in Scripture
as he ought to have been.

_J. D._ He taketh away his priestly or propitiatory office. _And
although this act of our redemption be not always in Scripture
called a sacrifice and oblation, but sometimes a price; yet by price
we are not to understand anything, by the value whereof he could
claim right to a pardon for us from his offended Father, but that
price which God the Father was pleased in mercy to demand._ And
again: _Not that the death of one man, though without sin, can
satisfy for the offences of all men in the rigour of justice, but in
the mercy of God, that ordained such sacrifices for sin, as he was
pleased in mercy to accept_. He knoweth no difference between one
who is mere man, and one who was both God and man; between a
Levitical sacrifice, and the all-sufficient sacrifice of the cross;
between the blood of a calf, and the precious blood of the Son of
God.

_T. H._ Yes, I know there is a difference between blood and blood,
but not any such as can make a difference in the case here
questioned. Our Saviour’s blood was most precious, but still it was
human blood; and I hope his Lordship did never think otherwise, or
that it was not accepted by his Father for our redemption.

_J. D._ And touching the prophetical office of Christ, I do much
doubt whether he do believe in earnest, that there is any such thing
as prophecy in the world. He maketh very little difference between a
_prophet_ and a _madman_, and a _demoniac_. _And if there were
nothing else_, says he, _that bewrayed their madness, yet that very
arrogating such inspiration to themselves is argument enough_. He
maketh the pretence of inspiration in any man to be, and always to
have been, _an opinion pernicious to peace, and tending to the
dissolution of all civil government_. He subjecteth all prophetical
revelations from God, to the sole pleasure and censure of the
sovereign prince, either to authorize them, or to exauctorate them.
So as two prophets prophecying the same thing at the same time, in
the dominions of two different princes, the one shall be a true
prophet, the other a false. And Christ, who had the approbation of
no sovereign prince, upon his grounds, was to be reputed a false
prophet everywhere. _Every man therefore ought to consider who is
the sovereign prophet; that is to say, who it is that is God’s
vicegerent upon earth, and hath next under God the authority of
governing Christian men; and to observe for a rule that doctrine,
which in the name of God he hath commanded to be taught, and thereby
to examine and try out the truth of those doctrines which pretended
prophets, with miracle or without, shall at any time advance_, &c.
_And if he disavow them, then no more to obey their voice; or if he
approve them, then to obey them as men, to whom God hath given a
part of the Spirit of their sovereign._ Upon his principles the case
holdeth as well among Jews and Turks and Heathens, as Christians.
Then he that teacheth transubstantiation in France, is a true
prophet; he that teacheth it in England, a false prophet; he that
blasphemeth Christ in Constantinople, a true prophet; he that doth
the same in Italy, a false prophet. Then Samuel was a false prophet
to contest with Saul, a sovereign prophet: so was the man of God,
who submitted not to the more Divine and prophetic spirit of
Jeroboam. And Elijah for reproving Ahab. Then Micaiah had but his
deserts, to be clapped up in prison, and fed with bread of
affliction, and water of affliction, for daring to contradict _God’s
vicegerent upon earth_. And Jeremiah was justly thrown into a
dungeon, for prophecying against Zedekiah his liege lord. If his
principles were true, it were strange indeed, that none of all these
princes, nor any other that ever was in the world, should understand
their own privileges. And yet more strange, that God Almighty should
take the part of such rebellious prophets, and justify their
prophesies by the event, if it were true that _none but the
sovereign in a Christian_ (the reason is the same for Jewish)
_commonwealth, can take notice, what is or what is not the word of
God_.

_T. H._ To remove his Lordship’s doubt in the first place, I confess
there was true prophesy and true prophets in the church of God, from
Abraham down to our Saviour, the greatest prophet of all, and the
last of the Old Testament, and first of the New. After our Saviour’s
time, till the death of St. John the apostle, there were true
prophets in the church of Christ, prophets to whom God spake
supernaturally, and testified the truth of their mission by
miracles. Of those that in the Scripture are called prophets without
miracles, (and for this cause only, that they spake in the name of
God to men, and in the name of men to God), there are, have been,
and shall be in the church, innumerable. Such a prophet was his
Lordship, and such are all pastors in the Christian church. But the
question here is of those prophets that from the mouth of God
foretell things future, or do other miracle. Of this kind I deny
there has been any since the death of St. John the Evangelist. If
any man find fault with this, he ought to name some man or other,
whom we are bound to acknowledge that they have done a miracle, cast
out a devil, or cured any disease by the sole invocation of the
Divine Majesty. We are not bound to trust to the legend of the Roman
saints, nor to the history written by Sulpitius of the life of St.
Martin, or to any other fables of the Roman clergy, nor to such
things as were pretended to be done by some divines here in the time
of king James. Secondly, he says I make little difference between a
_prophet_, and a _madman_ or _demoniac_; to which I say, he accuses
me falsely. I say only thus much, _that I see nothing at all in the
Scripture that requireth a belief, that demoniacs were any other
thing than madmen_. And this is also made very probable out of
Scripture, by a worthy divine, Mr. Mede. But concerning prophets, I
say only that the Jews, both under the Old Testament and under the
New, took them to be all one with _madmen_ and _demoniacs_; and
prove it out of Scripture by many places, both of the Old and New
Testament. Thirdly, that the pretence or arrogating to one’s-self
Divine inspiration, is argument enough to show a man is _mad_, is my
opinion; but his Lordship understands not _inspiration_ in the same
sense that I do. He understands it properly of God’s breathing into
a man, or pouring into him the Divine substance, or Divine graces.
And in that sense, he that arrogateth inspiration unto himself,
neither understands what he saith, nor makes others to understand
him: which is properly madness in some degree. But I understand
_inspiration_ in the Scripture metaphorically, for God’s guidance of
our minds to truth and piety. Fourthly, whereas he says, I make the
pretence of _inspiration_ to be pernicious to peace; I answer, that
I think his Lordship was of my opinion; for he called those men,
which in the late civil war pretended the spirit, and new light, and
to be the only faithful men, _fanatics_; for he called them in his
book, and did call them in his life-time, _fanatics_. And what is a
_fanatic_ but a _madman_? And what can be more pernicious to peace,
than the revelations that were by these _fanatics_ pretended? I do
not say there were not doctrines of other men, not called
_fanatics_, as pernicious to peace as their’s were, and in great
part a cause of those troubles. Fifthly, from that I make
prophetical revelations subject to the examination of the lawful
sovereign, he inferreth, that two prophets prophecying the same
thing at the same time, in the dominions of two different princes,
the one shall be a true prophet, the other a false. This consequence
is not good: for seeing they teach different doctrines, they cannot
both of them confirm their doctrine with miracles. But this I prove,
in the place (vol. iii. p. 426) he citeth, that whether either of
their doctrines shall be taught publicly or not, it is in the power
of the sovereign of the place only to determine. Nay, I say now
further, if a prophet come to any private man in the name of God,
that man shall be judge whether he be a true prophet or not, before
he obey him. See 1 John, iv. 1. Sixthly, whereas he says that, upon
my grounds, Christ was to be reputed a false prophet every where,
because his doctrine was received no where; his Lordship had read my
book more negligently, than was fit for one that would confute it.
My ground is this; that Christ in right of his Father was king of
the Jews, and consequently supreme prophet, and judge of all
prophets. What other princes thought of his prophesies, is nothing
to the purpose. I never said that princes can make doctrines or
prophesies true or false; but I say every sovereign prince has a
right to prohibit the public teaching of them, whether false or
true. But what an oversight is it in a divine, to say that Christ
had the approbation of no sovereign prince, when he had the
approbation of God, who was king of the Jews, and Christ his
viceroy, and the whole Scripture written (John, xx. 31) to prove it;
when his miracles declared it; when Pilate confessed it; and when
the apostles' office was to proclaim it? Seventhly, if we must not
consider, in points of Christian faith, who is the sovereign
prophet, that is, who is next under Christ our supreme head and
governor, I wish his Lordship would have cleared, ere he died, these
few questions. Is there not need of some judge of controverted
doctrines? I think no man can deny it, that has seen the rebellion
that followed the controversy here between Gomar and Arminius. There
must therefore be a judge of doctrines. But, says the Bishop, not
the king. Who then? Shall Dr. Bramhall be this judge? As profitable
an office as it is, he was more modest than to say that. Shall a
private layman have it? No man ever thought that. Shall it be given
to a Presbyterian minister? No; it is unreasonable. Shall a synod of
Presbyterians have it? No; for most of the Presbyters in the
primitive church were undoubtedly subordinate to bishops, and the
rest were bishops. Who then? A synod of bishops? Very well. His
Lordship being too modest to undertake the whole power, would have
been contented with the six-and-twentieth part. But, suppose it in a
synod of bishops, who shall call them together? The king. What if he
will not? Who should excommunicate him, or if he despise your
excommunication, who shall send forth a writ of _significavit_? No;
all this was far from his Lordship’s thoughts. The power of the
clergy, unless it be upheld legally by the king, or illegally by the
multitude, amounts to nothing. But for the multitude, Suarez and the
Schoolmen will never gain them, because they are not understood.
Besides there be very few bishops that can act a sermon, which is a
puissant part of _rhetoric_, so well as divers Presbyterians, and
fanatic preachers can do. I conclude therefore, that his Lordship
could not possibly believe that the supreme judicature in matter of
religion could any where be so well placed as in the head of the
church, which is the king. And so his Lordship and I think the same
thing; but because his Lordship knew not how to deduce it, he was
angry with me because I did it. He says, further, that _by my
principles, he that blasphemeth Christ at Constantinople, is a true
prophet_: as if a man that blasphemeth Christ, to approve his
blasphemy can procure a miracle. For by my principles, no man is a
prophet whose prophesy is not confirmed by God with a miracle. In
the last place, out of this, that the lawful sovereign is the judge
of prophesy, he deduces that then Samuel and other prophets were
false prophets, that contested with their sovereigns. As for Samuel,
he was at that time the judge, that is to say, the sovereign prince
in Israel, and so acknowledged by Saul. For Saul received the
kingdom from God himself, who had right to give and take it, by the
hands of Samuel. And God gave it to himself only, and not to his
seed; though if he had obeyed God, he would have settled it also
upon his seed. The commandment of God was, that he should not spare
Agag. Saul obeyed not. God therefore sent to Samuel to tell him that
he was rejected. For all this, Samuel went not about to resist Saul.
That he caused Agag to be slain, was with Saul’s consent. Lastly,
Saul confesses his sin. Where is this contesting with Saul? After
this God sent Samuel to anoint David, not that he should depose
Saul, but succeed him, the sons of Saul having never had a right of
succession. Nor did ever David make war on Saul, or so much as
resist him, but fled from his persecution. But when Saul was dead,
then indeed he claimed his right against the house of Saul. What
rebellion or resistance could his Lordship find here, either in
Samuel or in David? Besides, all these transactions are
supernatural, and oblige not to imitation. Is there any prophet or
priest now, that can set up in England, Scotland, or Ireland,
another king by pretence of prophecy or religion? What did Jeroboam
to the man of God (1 Kings xiii.) that prophesied against the altar
in Bethel without first doing a miracle, but offer to seize him for
speaking, as he thought, rashly of the king’s act; and after the
miraculous withering of his hand, desire the prophet to pray for
him? The sin of Jeroboam was not his distrust of the prophet, but
his idolatry. He was the sole judge of the truth which the man of
God uttered against the altar, and the process agreeable to equity.
What is the story of Elijah and Ahab (1 Kings xviii.), but a
confirmation of the right even of Ahab to be judge of prophecy?
Elijah told Ahab, he had transgressed the commandment of God. So may
any minister now tell his sovereign, so he do it with sincerity and
discretion. Ahab told Elijah he troubled Israel. Upon this
controversy Elijah desired trial. Send, saith he, and assemble all
Israel; assemble also the prophets of Baal, four hundred and fifty.
Ahab did so. The question is stated before the people thus: if the
Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, follow him. Then upon the
altars of God and Baal were laid the wood and the bullocks; and the
cause was to be judged by fire from heaven, to burn the sacrifices;
which Elijah procured, the prophets of Baal could not procure. Was
not this cause here pleaded before Ahab? The sentence of Ahab is not
required; for Elijah from that time forward was no more persecuted
by Ahab, but only by his wife, Jezabel. The story of Micaiah (2
Chron. xviii.) is this. Ahab King of Israel consulted the prophets,
four hundred in number, whether he should prosper or not, in case he
went with Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, to fight against the Syrians
at Ramoth-gilead. The prophet Micaiah was also called, and both the
kings, Ahab and Jehoshaphat, sat together to hear what they should
prophecy. There was no miracle done. The four hundred pronounced
victory; Micaiah alone the contrary. The king was judge, and most
concerned in the event; nor had he received any revelation in the
business. What could he do more discreetly than to follow the
counsel of four hundred, rather than of one man? But the event was
contrary; for he was slain; but not for following the counsel of the
four hundred, but for his murder of Naboth, and his idolatry. It was
also a sin in him, that he afflicted Micaiah in prison. But an
unjust judgment does not take away from any king his right of
judicature. Besides, what is all this, or that of Jeremiah which he
cites last, to the question of who is judge of Christian doctrine?

_J. D._ Neither doth he use God the Holy Ghost, more favourably
than God the Son. Where St. Peter saith, holy men of God spake as
they were moved by the Holy Spirit; he saith, _By the spirit, is
meant the voice of God in a dream or vision supernatural_; which
dreams or visions, he maketh to be no more than _imaginations
which they had in their sleep, or in an extasy, which in every
true prophet were supernatural, but in false prophets were either
natural or feigned_, and more likely to be false than true. To
say, _God hath spoken to him in a dream, is no more than to say,
he dreamed that God spake to him, &c. To say, he hath seen a
vision or heard a voice, is to say, that he hath dreamed between
sleeping and waking._ So St. Peter’s Holy Ghost, is come to be
their own imaginations, which might be either feigned, or
mistaken, or true. As if the Holy Ghost did enter only at their
eyes, and at their ears, not into their understandings, nor into
their minds; or as if the Holy Ghost did not seal unto their
hearts the truth and assurance of their prophecies. Whether a new
light be infused into their understandings, or new graces be
inspired into their heart, they are wrought, or caused, or created
immediately by the Holy Ghost; and so are his _imaginations_, if
they be supernatural.

_T. H._ For the places of my _Leviathan_ he cites, they are all,
as they stand, both true and clearly proved. The setting of them
down by fragments is no refutation; nor offers he any arguments
against them. His consequences are not deduced. I never said that
the Holy Ghost was an imagination, or a dream, or a vision, but
that the Holy Ghost spake most often in the Scripture by dreams
and visions supernatural. The next words of his, _as if the Holy
Ghost did enter only at their eyes, and at their ears, not into
their understandings, nor into their minds_, I let pass, because I
cannot understand them. His last words, _Whether new light, &c._ I
understand and approve.

_J. D._ But he must needs fall into these absurdities, who maketh
but a jest of inspiration. _They who pretend Divine inspiration to
be a supernatural entering of the Holy Ghost into a man, are_, as he
thinks, _in a very dangerous dilemma; for if they worship not the
men whom they conceive to be inspired, they fall into impiety; and
if they worship them, they commit idolatry_. So mistaking the Holy
Ghost to be corporeal, something that is blown into a man, and the
graces of the Holy Ghost to be corporeal graces. And the words,
_inpoured or infused virtue_, and, _inblown or inspired virtue, are
as absurd and as insignificant, as a round quadrangle_. He reckons
it as a common error, that _faith and sanctity are not attained by
study and reason, but by supernatural inspiration or infusion_. And
layeth this for a firm ground; _faith and sanctity are indeed not
very frequent, but yet they are not miracles, but brought to pass by
education, discipline, correction, and other natural ways_. I would
see the greatest Pelagian of them all, fly higher.

_T. H._ I make here no jest of inspiration. Seriously, I say, that
in the proper signification of the words _inspiration_ and
_infusion_, to say virtue is inspired, or infused, is as absurd as
to say a quadrangle is round. But metaphorically, for God’s
bestowing of faith, grace, or other virtue, those words are
intelligible enough.

_J. D._ Why should he trouble himself about the Holy Spirit, who
acknowledgeth no spirit, but either a subtle fluid body, or a ghost,
or other idol or phantasm of the imagination; who knoweth no inward
grace or intrinsical holiness? _Holy is a word which in God’s
kingdom answereth to that, which men in their kingdoms use to call
public, or the king’s._ And again, _wheresoever the word, holy, is
taken properly, there is still something signified of propriety
gotten by consent_. His holiness is a relation, not a quality; for
inward sanctification, or real infused holiness, (in respect whereof
the third person is called the Holy Ghost, because he is not only
holy in himself, but also maketh us holy), he is so great a stranger
to it, that he doth altogether deny it, and disclaim it.

_T. H._ The word _holy_ I had defined in the words which his
Lordship here sets down, and by the use thereof in the Scripture
made it manifest, that that was the true signification of the word.
There is nothing in learning more difficult than to determine the
signification of words. That difficulty excuses him. He says that
_holiness_, in my sense, is a relation, not a quality. All the
learned agree that quality is an accident: so that in attributing to
God _holiness_, as a quality, he contradicts himself. For he has in
the beginning of this his discourse denied, and rightly, that any
accident is in God; saying, whatsoever is in God is the Divine
substance. He affirms also, that to attribute any accident to God,
is to deny the simplicity of the Divine substance. And thus his
Lordship makes God, as I do, a corporeal spirit. Both here, and
throughout, he discovers so much ignorance, as had he charged me
with error only, and not with atheism, I should not have thought it
necessary to answer him.

_J. D._ We are taught in our creed to believe the catholic or
universal church. But T. H. teacheth us the contrary: _That if there
be more Christian churches than one, all of them together are not
one church personally_. And more plainly: _Now if the whole number
of Christians be not contained in one commonwealth, they are not one
person, nor is there an universal church, that hath any authority
over them_. And again: _The universal church is not one person, of
which it can be said, that it hath done, or decreed, or ordained, or
excommunicated, or absolved_. This doth quite overthrow all the
authority of general councils.

All other men distinguish between the church and the commonwealth;
only T. H. maketh them to be one and the same thing. _The
commonwealth of Christian men, and the church of the same, are
altogether the same thing, called by two names for two reasons. For
the matter of the church and of the commonwealth is the same,
namely, the same Christian men; and the form is the same, which
consisteth in the lawful power of convocating them._ And hence he
concludeth, that _every Christian commonwealth is a church endowed
with all spiritual authority_. And yet more fully: _The church if it
be one person, is the same thing with the commonwealth of
Christians; called a commonwealth, because it consisteth of men
united in one person their sovereign; and a church, because it
consisteth in Christian men united in one Christian sovereign_. Upon
which account there was no Christian church in these parts of the
world, for some hundreds of years after Christ, because there was no
Christian sovereign.

_T. H._ For answer to this period, I say only this; that taking the
church, as I do, in all those places, for a company of Christian men
on earth incorporated into one person, that can speak, command, or
do any act of a person, all that he citeth out of what I have
written is true; and that all private conventicles, though their
belief be right, are not properly called churches; and that there is
not any one universal church here on earth, which is a person indued
with authority universal to govern all Christian men on earth, no
more than there is one universal sovereign prince or state on earth,
that hath right to govern all mankind. I deny also that the whole
clergy of a Christian kingdom or state being assembled, are the
representative of that church further than the civil laws permit; or
can lawfully assemble themselves, unless by the command or by the
leave of the sovereign civil power. I say further, that the denial
of this point tendeth in England towards the taking away of the
king’s supremacy in causes ecclesiastical. But his Lordship has not
here denied any thing of mine, because he has done no more but set
down my words. He says further, that this doctrine destroys the
authority of all general councils; which I confess. Nor hath any
general council at this day in this kingdom the force of a law, nor
ever had, but by the authority of the king.

_J. D._ Neither is he more orthodox concerning the holy Scriptures:
_hitherto_, that is, for the books of Moses, _the power of making
the Scripture canonical, was in the civil sovereign_. The like he
saith of the Old Testament, made canonical by Esdras. And of the New
Testament, that _it was not the apostles which made their own
writings canonical, but every convert made them so to himself_: yet
with this restriction, that _until the sovereign ruler had
prescribed them, they were but counsel and advice, which whether
good or bad, he that was counselled might without injustice refuse
to observe, and being contrary to the laws established, could not
without injustice observe_. He maketh the primitive Christians to
have been in a pretty condition. Certainly the gospel was contrary
to the laws then established. But most plainly, _The word of the
interpreter of the Scripture is the word of God_. And the _same is
the interpreter of the Scripture, and the sovereign judge of all
doctrines_, that is, the sovereign magistrate, _to whose authority
we must stand no less, than to theirs, who at first did commend the
Scripture to us for the canon of faith_. Thus if Christian
sovereigns, of different communications, do clash one with another,
in their interpretation, or misinterpretation of Scripture, as they
do daily, then the word of God is contradictory to itself; or that
is the word of God in one commonwealth, which is the word of the
Devil in another commonwealth. And the same thing may be true, and
not true at the same time: which is the peculiar privilege of T. H.
to make contradictories to be true together.

_T. H._ There is no doubt but by what authority the Scripture or
any other writing is made a law, by the same authority the
Scriptures are to be interpreted, or else they are made law in
vain. But to obey is one thing, to believe is another; which
distinction perhaps his Lordship never heard of. To obey is to do
or forbear as one is commanded, and depends on the will; but to
believe, depends not on the will, but on the providence and
guidance of our hearts that are in the hands of God Almighty. Laws
only require obedience; belief requires teachers and arguments
drawn either from reason, or from some thing already believed.
Where there is no reason for our belief, there is no reason we
should believe. The reason why men believe, is drawn from the
authority of those men whom we have no just cause to mistrust,
that is, of such men to whom no profit accrues by their deceiving
us, and of such men as never used to lie, or else from the
authority of such men whose promises, threats, and affirmations,
we have seen confirmed by God with miracles. If it be not from the
king’s authority that the Scripture is law, what other authority
makes it law? Here some man being of his Lordship’s judgment, will
perhaps laugh and say, it is the authority of God that makes them
law. I grant that. But my question is, on what authority they
believe that God is the author of them? Here his Lordship would
have been at a nonplus, and turning round, would have said the
authority of the Scripture makes good that God is their author. If
it be said we are to believe the Scripture upon the authority of
the universal church, why are not the books we call Apocrypha the
word of God as well as the rest? If this authority be in the
church of England, then it is not any other than the authority of
the head of the church, which is the king. For without the head
the church is mute. The authority therefore is in the king; which
is all that I contended for in this point. As to the laws of the
Gentiles, concerning religion in the primitive times of the
church, I confess they were contrary to Christian faith. But none
of their laws, nor terrors, nor a man’s own will, are able to take
away faith, though they can compel to an external obedience; and
though I may blame the _Ethnic_ princes for compelling men to
speak what they thought not, yet I absolve not all those that have
had the power in Christian churches from the same fault. For I
believe, since the time of the first four general councils, there
have been more Christians burnt and killed in the Christian church
by ecclesiastical authority, than by the heathen emperors' laws,
for religion only without sedition. All that the Bishop does in
this argument is but a heaving at the King’s supremacy. Oh, but,
says he, if two kings interpret a place of Scripture in contrary
senses, it will follow that both senses are true. It does not
follow. For the interpretation, though it be made by just
authority, must not therefore always be true. If the doctrine in
the one sense be necessary to salvation, then they that hold the
other must die in their sins, and be damned. But if the doctrine
in neither sense be necessary to salvation, then all is well,
except perhaps that they will call one another atheists, and fight
about it.

_J. D._ All the power, virtue, use, and efficacy, which he ascribeth
to the holy sacraments, is to be _signs or commemorations_. As for
any sealing, or confirming, or conferring of grace, he acknowledged!
nothing. The same he saith particularly of baptism: upon which
grounds a cardinal’s red hat, or a serjeant-at-arms his mace, may be
called sacraments as well as baptism, or the holy eucharist, if they
be only signs and commemorations of a benefit. If he except, that
baptism and the eucharist are of Divine institution; but a
cardinal’s red hat or a serjeant-at-arms his mace are not: he saith
truly, but nothing to his advantage or purpose, seeing he deriveth
all the authority of the word and sacraments, in respect of
subjects, and all our obligation to them, from the authority of the
sovereign magistrate, without which these words, _Repent and be
baptized in the name of Jesus_, are but counsel, no command. And so
a serjeant-at-arms his mace, and baptism, proceed both from the same
authority. And this he saith upon this silly ground, _that nothing
is a command, the performance whereof tendeth to our own benefit_.
He might as well deny the Ten Commandments to be commands, because
they have an advantageous promise annexed to them, _Do this and thou
shalt live_; and _cursed is every one that continueth not in all the
words of this law to do them_.

_T. H._ Of the sacraments I said no more, than that they are _signs_
or _commemorations_. He finds fault that I add not _seals_,
_confirmations_, and that they _confer grace_. First, I would have
asked him, if a seal be any thing else besides a sign, whereby to
remember somewhat, as that we have promised, accepted, acknowledged,
given, undertaken somewhat. Are not other _signs_, though without a
_seal_, of force sufficient to convince me or oblige me? A writing
obligatory, or release, signed only with a man’s name, is as
obligatory as a bond signed and sealed, if it be sufficiently
proved, though peradventure it may require a longer process to
obtain a sentence; but his Lordship I think knew better than I do
the force of bonds and bills; yet I know this, that in the court of
heaven there is no such difference between saying, signing, and
sealing, as his Lordship seemeth here to pretend. I am baptized for
a commemoration that I have enrolled myself. I take the sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper to commemorate that Christ’s body was broken, and
his blood shed for my redemption. What is there more intimated
concerning the nature of these sacraments, either in the Scripture
or in the book of Common Prayer? Have bread and wine and water in
their own nature, any other quality than they had before the
consecration? It is true that the consecration gives these bodies a
new relation, as being a giving and dedicating of them to God, that
is to say a making of them holy, not a changing of their quality.
But as some silly young men returning from France affect a broken
English, to be thought perfect in the French language; so his
Lordship, I think, to seem a perfect understander of the
unintelligible language of the Schoolmen, pretends an ignorance of
his mother-tongue. He talks here of _command_ and _counsel_, as if
he were no Englishman, nor knew any difference between their
significations. What Englishman, when he commandeth, says more than,
_Do this_; yet he looks to be obeyed, if obedience be due unto him.
But when he says, _Do this, and thou shalt have such or such a
reward_, he encourages him, or advises him, or bargains with him;
but commands him not. Oh, the understanding of a Schoolman!

_J. D._ Sometimes he is for holy orders, and giveth to the pastors
of the church the right of ordination and absolution, and
infallibility, too much for a particular pastor, or the pastors of
one particular church. _It is manifest, that the consecration of the
chiefest doctors in every church, and imposition of hands, doth
pertain to the doctors of the same church._ And, _it cannot be
doubted of, but the power of binding and loosing was given by Christ
to the future pastors, after the same manner as to his present
apostles_. And, _our Saviour hath promised this infallibility in
those things which are necessary to salvation, to his apostles,
until the day of judgment, that is to say, to the apostles, and
pastors to be consecrated by the apostles successively, by the
imposition of hands_.

But at other times he casteth all this meal down with his foot.
_Christian sovereigns are the supreme pastors, and the only persons
whom Christians now hear speak from God, except such as God speaketh
to in these days supernaturally._ What is now become of the promised
infallibility? And, _it is from the civil sovereign that all other
pastors derive their right of teaching, preaching, and all other
functions pertaining to that office; and they are but his ministers
in the same manner as the magistrates of towns, or judges in courts
of justice, and commanders of armies_. What is now become of their
ordination? Magistrates, judges, and generals, need no precedent
qualifications. He maketh _the pastoral authority of sovereigns to
be_ jure divino, _of all other pastors_ jure civili: he addeth,
_neither is there any judge of heresy among subjects, but their own
civil sovereign_.

Lastly, _the church excommunicateth no man but whom she
excommunicateth by the authority of the prince_. And, _the effect of
excommunication hath nothing in it, neither of damage in this world,
nor terror upon an apostate, if the civil power did persecute or not
assist the church: and in the world to come, leaves them in no worse
estate, than those who never believed. The damage rather redoundeth
to the church. Neither is the excommunication of a Christian
subject, that obeyeth the laws of his own sovereign, of any effect._
Where is now their power of binding and loosing?

_T. H._ Here his Lordship condemneth, first my too much kindness to
the pastors of the church; as if I ascribed infallibility to every
particular minister, or at least to the assembly of the pastors of a
particular church. But he mistakes me; I never meant to flatter them
so much. I say only that the ceremony of consecration, and
imposition of hands, belongs to them; and that also no otherwise
than as given them by the laws of the commonwealth. The bishop
consecrates, but the king both makes him bishop and gives him his
authority. The head of the church not only gives the power of
consecration, dedication, and benediction, but may also exercise the
act himself if he please. Solomon did it; and the book of canons
says, that the King of England has all the right that any good king
of Israel had; it might have added, that any other king or sovereign
assembly had in their own dominions. I deny that any pastor or any
assembly of pastors in any particular church, or all the churches on
earth though united, are infallible: yet I say, the pastors of a
Christian church assembled are, in all such points as are _necessary
to salvation_. But about what points are _necessary to salvation_,
he and I differ. For I, in the forty-third chapter of my
_Leviathan_, have proved that this article, _Jesus is the Christ_,
is the _unum necessarium_, _the only article necessary to
salvation_; to which his Lordship hath not offered any objection.
And he, it seems, would have necessary to salvation every doctrine
he himself thought so. Doubtless in this article, _Jesus is the
Christ_, every church is infallible; for else it were no church.
Then he says, I overthrow this again by saying that Christian
sovereigns are the _supreme pastors_, that is, heads of their own
churches; _That they have their authority jure divino; that all
other pastors have it jure civili_. How came any Bishop to have
authority over me, but by letters patent from the king? I remember a
parliament wherein a bishop, who was both a good preacher and a good
man, was blamed for a book he had a little before published in
maintenance of the _jus divinum_ of bishops; a thing which before
the reformation here, was never allowed them by the pope. Two _jus
divinums_ cannot stand together in one kingdom. In the last place he
mislikes that the church should excommunicate by authority of the
king, that is to say, by authority of the head of the church. But he
tells not why. He might as well mislike that the magistrates of the
realm should execute their offices by the authority of the head of
the realm. His Lordship was in a great error, if he thought such
encroachments would add any thing to the wealth, dignity, reverence,
or continuance of his order. They are pastors of pastors, but yet
they are the sheep of him that is on earth their sovereign pastor,
and he again a sheep of that supreme pastor which is in heaven. And
if they did their pastoral office, both by life and doctrine, as
they ought to do, there could never arise any dangerous rebellion in
the land. But if the people see once any ambition in their teachers,
they will sooner learn that, than any other doctrine; and from
ambition proceeds rebellion.

_J. D._ It may be some of T. H. his disciples desire to know what
hopes of heavenly joys they have upon their master’s principles.
They may hear them without any great contentment: _There is no
mention in Scripture, nor ground in reason, of the cœlum empyræum_,
that is, the heaven of the blessed, where the saints shall live
eternally with God. And again, _I have not found any text that can
probably be drawn to prove any ascension of the saints into heaven,
that is to say, into any cœlum empyræum_. But he concludeth
positively, that _Salvation shall be upon earth, when God shall
reign at the coming of Christ in Jerusalem_. And again, _In short,
the kingdom of God is a civil kingdom_, &c. called also _the kingdom
of heaven, and the kingdom of glory_. All the Hobbians can hope for,
is, to be restored to the same condition which Adam was in before
his fall. So saith T. H. himself: _From whence may be inferred, that
the elect, after the resurrection, shall be restored to the estate
wherein Adam was before he had sinned_. As for the beatifical
vision, he defineth it to be a word unintelligible.

_T. H._ This _cœlum empyræum_ for which he pretendeth so much zeal,
where is it in the Scripture, where in the book of Common Prayer,
where in the canons, where in the homilies of the church of England,
or in any part of our religion? What has a Christian to do with such
language? Nor do I remember it in Aristotle. Perhaps it may be in
some Schoolman or commentator on Aristotle, and his Lordship makes
it in English the _heaven of the blessed_, as if _empyræum_
signified _that which belongs to the blessed_. St. Austin says
better; that after the day of judgment all that is not heaven shall
be hell. Then for _beatifical vision_, how can any man understand
it, that knows from the Scripture that no man ever saw or can see
God. Perhaps his Lordship thinks that the happiness of the life to
come is not real, but a vision. As for that which I say
(_Leviathan_, p. 625), I have answered to it already.

_J. D._ But considering his other principles, I do not marvel much
at his extravagance in this point. To what purpose should a _cœlum
empyræum_, or heaven of the blessed, serve in his judgment, who
maketh the blessed angels that are the inhabitants of that happy
mansion, to be either idols of the brain, that is in plain English,
nothing, or thin, subtile, fluid bodies, destroying the angelical
nature. _The universe being the aggregate of all bodies, there is no
real part thereof that is not also body._ And elsewhere, _Every part
of the universe is body, and that which is not body, is no part of
the universe. And because the universe is all, that which is no part
of it is nothing, and consequently nowhere._ How? By this doctrine
he maketh not only the angels, but God himself to be nothing.
Neither doth he salve it at all, by supposing erroneously angels to
be corporeal spirits, and by attributing the name of incorporeal
spirit to God, _as being a name of more honour, in whom we consider
not what attribute best expresseth his nature, which is
incomprehensible, but what best expresseth our desire to honour
him_. Though we be not able to comprehend perfectly what God is, yet
we are able perfectly to comprehend what God is not, that is, he is
not imperfect, and therefore he is not finite, and consequently he
is not corporeal. This were a trim way to honour God indeed, to
honour him with a lie. If this that he says here be true, that
_every part of the universe is a body, and whatsoever is not a body
is nothing_, then, by this doctrine, if God be not a body, God is
nothing: not an incorporeal spirit, but _one of the idols of the
brain_, a mere nothing, though they think they dance under a net,
and have the blind of God’s incomprehensibility between them and
discovery.

_T. H._ This of _incorporeal substance_ he urged before, and there I
answered it. I wonder he so often rolls the same stone. He is like
Sisyphus in the poet’s hell, that there rolls a heavy stone up a
hill, which no sooner he brings to day-light, than it slips down
again to the bottom, and serves him so perpetually. For so his
Lordship rolls this and other questions with much ado, till they
come to the light of Scripture, and then they vanish; and he vexing,
sweating, and railing, goes to it again, to as little purpose as
before. From that I say of the universe, he infers, that I make God
to be nothing: but infers it absurdly. He might indeed have inferred
that I make him a corporeal, but yet a pure spirit. I mean by the
universe, the aggregate of all things that have being in themselves;
and so do all men else. And because God has a being, it follows that
he is either the whole universe, or part of it. Nor does his
Lordship go about to disprove it, but only seems to wonder at it.

_J. D._ To what purpose should a _cœlum empyræum_ serve in his
judgment, who denieth the immortality of the soul? _The doctrine is
now, and hath been a long time, far otherwise; namely, that every
man hath eternity of life by nature, inasmuch as his soul is
immortal._ Who supposeth that _when a man dieth, there remaineth
nothing of him but his carcase_? Who maketh the word _soul_ in Holy
Scripture to signify always either the life, or the living creature;
and expoundeth the casting of body and soul into hell-fire, to be
_the casting of body and life into hell-fire_? Who maketh this
orthodox truth, that the souls of men are substances distinct from
their bodies, to be _an error contracted by the contagion of the
demonology of the Greeks, and a window that gives entrance to the
dark doctrine of eternal torments_? Who expoundeth these words of
Solomon (_Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the
spirit shall return to God that gave it_) thus, _God only knows what
becometh of a man’s spirit when he expireth_? He will not
acknowledge that there is a spirit, or any substance distinct from
the body. I wonder what they think doth keep their bodies from
stinking.

_T. H._ He comes here to that which is a great paradox in
School-divinity. The grounds of my opinion are the canonical
Scripture, and the texts which I cited I must again recite, to which
I shall also add some others. My doctrine is this: first, _that the
elect in Christ, from the day of judgment forward, by virtue of
Christ’s passion and victory over death, shall enjoy eternal life,
that is, they shall be immortal_. Secondly, _that there is no living
soul separated in place from the body, more than there is a living
body separated from the soul_. Thirdly, _that the reprobate shall be
revived to judgment, and shall die a second death in torments, which
death shall be everlasting_. Now let us consider what is said to
these points in the Scripture, and what is the harmony therein of
the Old and New Testament.

And first, because the word _immortal soul_, is not found in the
Scriptures, the question is to be decided by evident consequences
from the Scripture. The Scripture saith of God expressly (1 Tim. vi.
16) that _He only hath immortality, and dwelleth in inaccessible
light_. Hence it followeth that the soul of man is not of its own
nature immortal, but by grace, that is to say, by the gift of God.
And then the question will be, whether this grace or gift of God
were bestowed on the soul in the creation and conception of the man,
or afterwards by his redemption. Another question will be, in what
sense immortality of torments can be called a gift, when all gifts
suppose the thing given to be grateful to the receiver. To the first
of these, Christ himself saith (Luke xiv. 13, 14): _When thou makest
a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind: and thou
shalt be blessed, for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shalt be
recompensed at the resurrection of them that be just_. It follows
hence that the reward of the elect is not before the resurrection.
What reward then enjoys a separated soul in heaven, or any where
else, till that day come, or what has he to do there till the body
rise again? Again, St. Paul says (Rom. ii. 6-8): _God will render to
every man according to his works. To them, who by patient
continuance in well doing seek for honour, glory, and immortality,
eternal life. But unto them that be contentious, and do not obey the
truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath._ Here it is
plain that God gives eternal life only to well doers, and to them
that seek, not to them that have already, immortality. Again (2 Tim.
i. 10): _Christ hath abolished death, and brought life and
immortality to light, through the Gospel_. Therefore before the
Gospel of Christ, nothing was immortal but God. And St. Paul,
speaking of the day of judgment (1 Cor. xv. 54), saith, that _this
mortal shall put on immortality_, and _that then death is swallowed
up in victory_. There was no immortality of any thing mortal till
death was overcome, and that was at the resurrection. And John,
viii. 51: _Verily, verily, if a man keep my sayings he shall never
see death_; that is to say, he shall be immortal. But it is nowhere
said, that he which keeps not Christ’s sayings shall never see
death, nor be immortal: and yet they that say that the wicked, body
and soul, shall be tormented everlastingly, do therein say they are
immortal. Matth. x. 28: _Fear not them that can kill the body, but
are not able to kill the soul; but fear him that is able to destroy
both soul and body in hell_. Man cannot kill a soul; for the man
killed shall revive again. But God can destroy the soul and body in
hell, as that it shall never return to life. In the Old Testament
(Gen. vii. 4) we read: _I will destroy every living substance that I
have made, from off the face of the earth_; therefore, if the souls
of them that perished in the Flood were substances, they were also
destroyed in the Flood, and were not immortal. Matth. xxv. 41:
_Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels_. These words are to be spoken in the day of
judgment, which judgment is to be in the clouds. And there shall
stand the men that are reprobated alive, where souls, according to
his Lordship’s doctrine, were sent long before to hell. Therefore at
that present day of judgment they had one soul by which they were
there alive, and another soul in hell. How his Lordship could have
maintained this, I understand not. But by my doctrine, that the soul
is not a separated substance, but that the man at his resurrection
shall be revived by God, and raised to judgment, and afterwards body
and soul destroyed in hell-fire, which is the second death, there is
no such consequence or difficulty to be inferred. Besides, it avoids
the unnecessary disputes about where the soul of Lazarus was for
four days he lay dead. And the order of the divine process is made
good, of not inflicting torments before the condemnation pronounced.

Now as to the harmony of the two Testaments, it is said in the Old
(Gen. ii. 17): _In the day that thou eatest of the tree of
knowledge, dying thou shalt die: moriendo morieris_: that is, when
thou art dead thou shalt not revive; for so hath Athanasius
expounded it. Therefore Adam and Eve were not immortal by their
creation. Then (Gen. iii. 22): _Behold the man is become as one of
us: now lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of
life, and eat, and live for ever, &c._ Here they had had an
immortality by the gift of God if they had not sinned. It was
therefore sin that lost them eternal life. He therefore that
redeemed them from sin was the author of their immortality, which
consequently began in the day of judgment, when Adam and Eve were
again made alive by admission to the new tree of life, which was
Christ.

Now let us compare this with the New Testament; where we find these
words (1 Cor. xv. 21): _since by man came death, by man came also
the resurrection of the dead_. Therefore all the immortality of the
soul, that shall be after the resurrection, is by Christ, and not by
the nature of the soul. Verse 22: _As by Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive_. Therefore since we died by Adam’s
sin, so we shall live by Christ’s redemption of us, that is, after
the resurrection. Again (verse 23): _But every man in his own order;
Christ the first-fruits, afterwards they that are Christ’s, at his
coming_. Therefore none shall be made alive till the coming of
Christ. Lastly, as when God had said, _that day that thou eatest of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt die_, though he
condemned him then, yet he suffered him to live a long time after;
so when Christ had said to the thief on the cross, _this day thou
shalt be with me in Paradise_, yet he suffered him to lie dead till
the general resurrection, for no man rose again from the dead before
our Saviour’s coming, and conquering death.

If God bestowed immortality on every man then when he made him, and
he made many to whom he never purposed to give his saving grace,
what did his Lordship think that God gave any man immortality with
purpose only to make him capable of immortal torments? It is a hard
saying, and I think cannot piously be believed. I am sure it can
never be proved by the canonical Scripture.

But though I have made it clear that it cannot be drawn by lawful
consequence from Scripture, that man was created with a soul
immortal, and that the elect only, by the grace of God in Christ,
shall both bodies and souls from the resurrection forward be
immortal; yet there may be a consequence well drawn from some words
in the rites of burial, that prove the contrary, as these:
_Forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God of his great mercy, to
take unto himself the soul of our dear brother here departed_, &c.
And these: _Almighty God, with whom do live the spirits of them that
depart hence in the Lord_: which are words authorised by the church.
I wonder his Lordship, that had so often pronounced them, took no
notice of them here. But it often happens that men think of those
things least, which they have most perfectly learnt by rote. I am
sorry I could not, without deserting the sense of Scripture and mine
own conscience, say the same. But I see no just cause yet, why the
church should be offended at it. For the church of England
pretendeth not, as doth the church of Rome, to be above the
Scripture; nor forbiddeth any man to read the Scripture; nor was I
forbidden, when I wrote my _Leviathan_, to publish anything which
the Scriptures suggested. For when I wrote it, I may safely say
there was no lawful church in England, that could have maintained me
in, or prohibited me from writing anything. There was no bishop; and
though there was preaching, such as it was, yet no common prayer.
For extemporary prayer, though made in the pulpit, is not common
prayer. There was then no church in England, that any man living was
bound to obey. What I write here at this present time I am forced to
in my defence, not against the church, but against the accusations
and arguments of my adversaries. For the church, though it
excommunicates for scandalous life, and for teaching false
doctrines, yet it professeth to impose nothing to be held as faith,
but what may be warranted by Scripture: and this the church itself
saith in the twentieth of the Thirty-nine Articles of religion. And
therefore I am permitted to allege Scripture at any time in the
defence of my belief.

_J. D._ But they that in one case are grieved, in another must be
relieved. If perchance T. H. hath given his disciples any discontent
in his doctrine of _heaven_ and the _holy angels_, and _the
glorified souls of the saints_, he will make them amends in his
doctrine of _hell_, and the _devils_, and the _damned spirits_.
First of the devils; he fancieth that all those devils which our
Saviour did cast out, were phrenzies; and all _demoniacs_, or
persons possessed, _no other than madmen_: and to justify _our
Saviour’s speaking to a disease as to a person_, produceth the
example of enchanters. But he declareth himself most clearly upon
this subject, in his animadversions upon my reply to his defence of
fatal destiny. _There are in the Scripture two sorts of things which
are in English translated devils. One is that which is called Satan,
Diabolus Abaddon, which signifieth in English an enemy, an accuser,
and a destroyer of the church of God; in which sense the devils are
but wicked men. The other sort of devils are called in the Scripture
Dæmonia, which are the feigned Gods of the heathen, and are neither
bodies nor spiritual substances, but mere fancies, and fictions of
terrified hearts, feigned by the Greeks, and other heathen people,
which St. Paul calleth nothings._ So T. H. hath killed the great
infernal Devil, and all his black angels, and left no devils to be
feared, but devils incarnate, that is, wicked men.

_T. H._ As for the first words cited (_Leviathan_, vol. iii. p. 68)
I refer the reader to the place itself; and for the words concerning
Satan, I leave them to the judgment of the learned.

_J. D._ And for _hell_, he describeth the _kingdom of Satan_, or the
_kingdom of darkness_, to be _a confederacy of deceivers_. He
telleth us that the places, which set forth the torments of hell in
holy Scripture, _do design metaphorically a grief and discontent of
mind, from the sight of that eternal felicity in others, which they
themselves, through their own incredulity and disobedience, have
lost_. As if metaphorical descriptions did not bear sad truths in
them, as well as literal; as if final desperation were no more than
a little fit of grief or discontent; and a guilty conscience were no
more than a transitory passion; as if it were a loss so easily to be
borne, to be deprived for evermore of the beatifical vision; and
lastly, as if the damned, besides that unspeakable loss, did not
likewise suffer actual torments, proportionable in some measure to
their own sins, and God’s justice.

_T. H._ That metaphors bear sad truths in them, I deny not. It is a
sad thing to lose this present life untimely. Is it not therefore
much more a sad thing to lose an eternal happy life? And I believe
that he which will venture upon sin, with such danger, will not
stick to do the same notwithstanding the doctrine of eternal
torture. Is it not also a sad truth, that the kingdom of darkness
should be a confederacy of deceivers?

_J. D._ Lastly, for the damned spirits, he declareth himself every
where, that their sufferings are not eternal. _The fire shall be
unquenchable, and the torments everlasting; but it cannot be thence
inferred, that he who shall be cast into that fire, or_ _be
tormented with those torments, shall endure and resist them, so as
to be eternally burnt and tortured, and yet never be destroyed nor
die. And though there be many places, that affirm everlasting fire,
into which men may be cast successively one after another for ever;
yet I find none that affirm that there shall be an everlasting life
therein of any individual person._ If he had said, and said only,
that the pains of the damned may be lessened, as to the degree of
them, or that they endure not for ever, but that after they are
purged by long torments from their dross and corruptions, as gold in
the fire, both the damned spirits and the devils themselves should
be restored to a better condition; he might have found some ancients
(who are therefore called _the merciful doctors_) to have joined
with him; though still he should have wanted the suffrage of the
Catholic church.

_T. H._ Why does not his Lordship cite some place of Scripture here
to prove, that all the reprobates which are dead, live eternally in
torment? We read indeed, that everlasting torments were prepared for
the Devil and his angels, whose natures also are everlasting; and
that the _Beast_ and the _false prophet_ shall be tormented
everlastingly; but not that every reprobate shall be so. They shall
indeed be cast into the same fire; but the Scripture says plainly
enough, that they shall be both body and soul destroyed there. If I
had said that the devils themselves should be restored to a better
condition, his Lordship would have been so kind as to have put me
into the number of the _merciful doctors_. Truly, if I had had any
warrant for the possibility of their being less enemies to the
church of God than they have been, I would have been as merciful to
them as any doctor of them all. As it is, I am more merciful than
the Bishop.

_J. D._ But his shooting is not at rovers, but altogether at random,
without either precedent or partner. All that _eternal fire_, all
those torments which he acknowledgeth, is but this, that _after the
resurrection, the reprobate shall be in the estate that Adam and his
posterity were in, after the sin committed, saving that God promised
a redeemer to Adam and not to them_: adding, _that they shall live
as they did formerly, marry and give in marriage; and consequently
engender children perpetually after the resurrection, as they did
before_: which he calleth _an immortality of the kind, but not of
the persons of men_. It is to be presumed, that in those their
second lives, knowing certainly from T. H. that there is no hope of
redemption for them from corporal death upon their well-doing, nor
fear of any torments after death for their ill-doing, they will pass
their times here as pleasantly as they can. This is all the
damnation which T. H. fancieth.

_T. H._ This he has urged once before, and I answered to it, that
the whole paragraph was to prove, that for any text of Scripture to
the contrary, men might, after the resurrection, live as Adam did on
earth; and that, notwithstanding the text of St. Luke, (chap. xx.
34-36), _Marry and propagate_. But that they shall do so, is no
assertion of mine. His Lordship knew I held, that after the
resurrection there shall be at all no wicked men; but the elect (all
that are, have been, and hereafter shall be) shall live on earth.
But St. Peter (2 Epist. iii. 13) says, there shall then be _a new
heaven and a new earth_.

_J. D._ In sum I leave it to the free judgment of the understanding
reader, by these few instances which follow, to judge what the
Hobbian principles are in point of religion. _Ex ungue leonem._

First, that no man needs to put himself to any hazard for his faith,
but may safely comply with the times. _And for their faith it is
internal and invisible. They have the licence that Naaman had, and
need not put themselves into danger for it._

Secondly, he alloweth subjects, being commanded by their sovereign,
to deny Christ. _Profession with the tongue is but an external
thing, and no more than any other gesture, whereby we signify our
obedience: and wherein a Christian, holding firmly in his heart the
faith of Christ, hath the same liberty which the prophet Elisha
allowed to Naaman, &c. who by bowing before the idol Rimmon, denied
the true God as much in effect, as if he had done it with his lips._
Alas, why did St. Peter weep so bitterly for denying his master, out
of fear of his life or members? It seems he was not acquainted with
these Hobbian principles. And in the same place he layeth down this
general conclusion: _This we may say, that whatsoever a subject is
compelled to, in obedience to his sovereign, and doth it not in
order to his own mind, but in order to the laws of his country, that
action is not his, but his sovereign’s; nor is it he, that in this
case denieth Christ before men, but his governor and the law of his
country_. His instance, in a Mahometan commanded by a Christian
prince to be present at divine service, is a weak mistake, springing
from his gross ignorance in case-divinity, not knowing to
distinguish between an erroneous conscience, as the Mahometan’s is,
and a conscience rightly informed.

_T. H._ In these his two first instances, I confess his Lordship
does not much belie me. But neither does he confute me. Also I
confess my ignorance in his case-divinity, which is grounded upon
the doctrine of the Schoolmen; who to decide cases of conscience,
take in, not only the Scriptures, but also the decrees of the popes
of Rome, for the advancing of the dominion of the Roman church over
consciences; whereas the true decision of cases of consciences ought
to be grounded only on Scripture, or natural equity. I never allowed
the denying of Christ with the tongue in all men, but expressly say
the contrary (_Leviathan_, vol. iii. p. 656) in these words: _For an
unlearned man that is in the power of an idolatrous king or state,
if commanded on pain of death to worship before an idol, he
detesteth the idol in his heart, he doth well; though if he had the
fortitude to suffer death rather than worship it, he should do
better. But if a pastor, who as Christ’s messenger has undertaken to
teach Christ’s doctrine to all nations, should do the same, it were
not only a sinful scandal in respect of other Christian men’s
consciences, but a perfidious forsaking of his charge._ Therefore
St. Peter, in denying Christ, sinned, as being an apostle. And it is
sin in every man that should now take upon him to preach against the
power of the Pope, to leave his commission unexecuted for fear of
the fire; but in a mere traveller, not so. The three children and
Daniel were worthy champions of the true religion. But God requireth
not of every man to be a champion. As for his Lordship’s words of
_complying with the times_, they are not mine, but his own spiteful
paraphrase.

_J. D._ Thirdly, if this be not enough, he giveth licence to a
Christian to commit idolatry, or at least to do an idolatrous act,
for fear of death or corporal danger. _To pray unto a king
voluntarily for fair weather, or for anything which God only can do
for us, is Divine worship, and idolatry. On the other side, if a
king compel a man to it by the terror of death, or other great
corporal punishment, it is not idolatry._ His reason is, because _it
is not a sign, that he doth inwardly honour him as a God, but that
he is desirous to save himself from death, or from a miserable
life_. It seemeth T. H. thinketh there is no Divine worship but
internal: and that it is lawful for a man to value his own life or
his limbs more than his God. How much is he wiser than the three
children, or Daniel himself, who were thrown, the first into a fiery
furnace, the last into the lions' den, because they refused to
comply with the idolatrous decree of their sovereign prince?

_T. H._ Here also my words are truly cited. But his Lordship
understood not what the word _worship_ signifies; and yet he knew
what I meant by it. To think highly of God, as I had defined it, is
to honour him. But _to think_ is internal. To worship, is to signify
that honour, which we inwardly give, by signs _external_. This
understood, as by his Lordship it was, all he says to it, is but a
cavil.

_J. D._ A fourth aphorism may be this, _that, which is said in the
Scripture, it is better to obey God than man, hath place in the
kingdom of God by pact, and not by nature_. Why? Nature itself doth
teach us it is better to obey God than men. Neither can he say that
he intended this only of obedience in the use of indifferent actions
and gestures, in the service of God, commanded by the commonwealth:
for that is to obey both God and man. But if Divine law and human
law clash one with another, without doubt it is evermore better to
obey God than man.

_T. H._ Here again appears his unskilfulness in reasoning. Who
denies, but it is always, and in all cases, better to obey God than
man? But there is no law, neither Divine nor human, that ought to be
taken for a law, till we know what it is; and if a Divine law, till
we know that God hath commanded it to be kept. We agree that the
Scriptures are the word of God. But they are a law by pact, that is,
to us who have been baptized into the covenant. To all others it is
an invitation only to their own benefit. It is true that even nature
suggesteth to us that the law of God is to be obeyed rather than the
law of man. But nature does not suggest to us that the Scripture is
the law of God, much less how every text of it ought to be
interpreted. But who then shall suggest this? Dr. Bramhall? I deny
it. Who then? The stream of divines? Why so? Am I, that have the
Scripture itself before my eyes, obliged to venture my eternal life
upon their interpretation, how learned soever they pretend to be,
when no counter-security, that they can give me, will save me
harmless? If not the stream of divines, who then? The lawful
assembly of pastors, or of bishops? But there can be no lawful
assembly in England without the authority of the King. The
Scripture, therefore, what it is, and how to be interpreted, is made
known unto us here, by no other way than the authority of our
sovereign lord both in temporals and spirituals, the King’s Majesty.
And where he has set forth no interpretation, there I am allowed to
follow my own, as well as any other man, bishop or not bishop. For
my own part, all that know me, know also it is my opinion, that the
best government in religion is by episcopacy, but in the King’s
right, not in their own. But my Lord of Derry, not contented with
this, would have the utmost resolution of our faith to be into the
doctrine of the Schools. I do not think that all the bishops be of
his mind. If they were, I would wish them to stand in fear of that
dreadful sentence, _all covet, all lose_. I must not let pass these
words of his Lordship, _if Divine law and human law clash one with
another, without doubt it is better evermore to obey God than man_.
Where the king is a Christian, believes the Scripture, and hath the
legislative power both in church and state, and maketh no laws
concerning Christian faith, or Divine worship, but by the counsel of
his bishops whom he trusteth in that behalf; if the bishops counsel
him aright, what clashing can there be between the Divine and human
laws? For if the civil law be against God’s law, and the bishops
make it clearly appear to the king that it clasheth with Divine law,
no doubt he will mend it by himself, or by the advice of his
parliament; for else he is no professor of Christ’s doctrine, and so
the clashing is at an end. But if they think that every opinion they
hold, though obscure and unnecessary to salvation, ought presently
to be law, then there will be clashings innumerable, not only of
laws, but also of swords, as we have found it too true by late
experience. But his Lordship is still at this, that there ought to
be, for the Divine laws, that is to say for the interpretation of
Scripture, a legislative power in the church, distinct from that of
the King, which under him they enjoy already. This I deny. Then for
clashing between the civil laws of infidels with the law of God, the
apostles teach that those their civil laws are to be obeyed, but so
as to keep their faith in Christ entirely in their hearts; which is
an obedience easily performed. But I do not believe that Augustus
Cæsar or Nero was bound to make the holy Scripture law; and yet
unless they did so, they could not attain to eternal life.

_J. D._ His fifth conclusion may be, that the sharpest and most
successful sword, in any war whatsoever, doth give sovereign power
and authority to him that hath it, to approve or reject all sorts of
theological doctrines, concerning the kingdom of God, not according
to their truth or falsehood, but according to that influence which
they have upon political affairs. Hear him: _but because this
doctrine will appear to most men a novelty, I do but propound it,
maintaining nothing in this or any other paradox of religion, but
attending the end of that dispute of the sword concerning the
authority (not yet amongst my countrymen decided) by which all sorts
of doctrine are to be approved or rejected_, &c. _For, the points of
doctrine concerning the kingdom of God, have so great influence upon
the kingdom of man, as not to be determined, but by them that under
God have the sovereign power._

              “———————— Careat successibus opto,
              Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.”

Let him evermore want success who thinketh actions are to be judged
by their events. This doctrine may be plausible to those who desire
to fish in troubled waters. But it is justly hated by those which
are in authority, and all those who are lovers of peace and
tranquillity.

The last part of this conclusion smelleth rankly of Jeroboam (1
Kings xii. 26-28): _Now shall the kingdom return to the house of
David, if this people go up to do sacrifice in the house of the Lord
at Jerusalem; whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves
of gold, and said unto them, it is too much for you to go up to
Jerusalem, behold thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the
land of Egypt_. But by the just disposition of Almighty God, this
policy turned to a sin, and was the utter destruction of Jeroboam
and his family. It is not good jesting with edge-tools, nor playing
with holy things: where men make their greatest fastness, many times
they find most danger.

_T. H._ His Lordship either had a strange conscience, or understood
not English. Being at Paris when there was no bishop nor church in
England, and every man writ what he pleased, I resolved (when it
should please God to restore the authority ecclesiastical) to submit
to that authority, in whatsoever it should determine. This his
Lordship construes for a temporizing and too much indifferency in
religion; and says further, that the last part of my words do smell
of Jeroboam. To the contrary, I say my words were modest, and such
as in duty I ought to use. And I profess still, that whatsoever the
church of England (the church, I say, not every doctor) shall forbid
me to say in matter of faith, I shall abstain from saying it,
excepting this point, _that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, died for
my sins_. As for other doctrines, I think it unlawful, if the church
define them, for any member of the church to contradict them.

_J. D._ His sixth paradox is a rapper: _The civil laws are the rules
of good and evil, just and unjust, honest and dishonest; and
therefore what the lawgiver commands, that is to be accounted good,
what he forbids, bad_. And a little after: _Before empires were,
just and unjust were not, as whose nature is relative to a command,
every action in its own nature is indifferent_. That is, _just or
unjust proceedeth from the right of him that commandeth. Therefore
lawful kings make those things which they command just, by
commanding them, and those things which they forbid, unjust by
forbidding them._ To this add his definition of a sin, _that which
one doth, or omitteth, saith, or willeth, contrary to the reason of
the commonwealth, that is, the (civil) laws_. Where by the laws he
doth not understand the written laws, elected and approved by the
whole commonwealth, but the verbal commands or mandates of him that
hath the sovereign power, as we find in many places of his writings.
_The civil laws are nothing else but the commands of him, that is
endowed with sovereign power in the commonwealth, concerning the
future actions of his subjects. And the civil laws are fastened to
the lips of that man who hath the sovereign power._

Where are we? In Europe? or in Asia, where they ascribed a divinity
to their kings, and, to use his own phrase, made _them mortal gods;
O king, live for ever_? Flatterers are the common moths of great
palaces, where Alexander’s friends are more numerous than the king’s
friends. But such gross, palpable, pernicious flattery as this is, I
did never meet with, so derogatory both to piety and policy. What
deserveth he who should do his uttermost endeavour to poison a
common fountain, whereof all the commonwealth must drink? He doth
the same who poisoneth the mind of a sovereign prince.

Are _the civil laws the rules of good and bad, just and unjust,
honest and dishonest_? And what, I pray you, are the rules of the
civil law itself? Even the law of God and Nature. If the civil laws
swerve from these more authentic laws, they are Lesbian rules. _What
the lawgiver commands is to be accounted good, what he forbids,
bad._ This was just the garb of the Athenian sophisters, as they are
described by Plato. Whatsoever pleased the great beast, the
multitude, they call holy, and just, and good. And whatsoever the
great beast disliked, they called evil, unjust, profane. But he is
not yet arrived at the height of his flattery. _Lawful kings make
those things, which they command, just by commanding them._ At other
times, when he is in his right wits, he talketh of sufferings, and
_expecting their reward in heaven. And going to Christ by martyrdom.
And if he had the fortitude to suffer death he should do better._
But I fear all this was but said in jest. How should they expect
their reward in heaven, if his doctrine be true, _that there is no
reward in heaven_? Or how should they be martyrs, if his doctrine be
true, that _none can be martyrs, but those who conversed with Christ
upon earth_? He addeth, _before empires were, just and unjust were
not_. Nothing could be written more false in his sense, more
dishonourable to God, more inglorious to the human nature; than that
God should create man, and leave him presently without any rules, to
his own ordering of himself, as the ostrich leaveth her eggs in the
sand. But in truth there have been empires in the world ever since
Adam. And Adam had a law written in his heart by the finger of God,
before there was any civil law. Thus they do endeavour to make
goodness, and justice, and honesty, and conscience, and God himself,
to be empty names, without any reality, which signify nothing,
further than they conduce to a man’s interest. Otherwise he would
not, he could not, say, that _every action as it is invested with
its circumstances, is indifferent in its own nature_.

_T. H._ My sixth paradox he calls a rapper. A rapper, a swapper, and
such like terms, are his Lordship’s elegancies. But let us see what
this rapper is: it is this; the civil laws are the rules of good and
evil, just and unjust, honest and dishonest. Truly, I see no other
rules they have. The Scriptures themselves were made law to us here,
by the authority of the commonwealth, and are therefore part of the
law civil. If they were laws in their own nature, then were they
laws over all the world, and men were obliged to obey them in
America, as soon as they should be shown there, though without a
miracle, by a friar. What is unjust, but the transgression of a law?
_Law_ therefore was before unjust: and the law was made known by
sovereign power before it was a law: therefore _sovereign power_ was
antecedent both to _law_ and _injustice_. Who then made unjust but
sovereign kings or sovereign assemblies? Where is now the wonder of
this rapper, _that lawful kings make those things which they command
just, by commanding them, and those things which they forbid unjust,
by forbidding them_? Just and unjust were surely made. If the king
made them not, who made them else? For certainly the breach of a
civil law is a sin against God. Another calumny which he would fix
upon me, is, that I make the King’s verbal commands to be laws. How
so? Because I say, _the civil laws are nothing else but the commands
of him that hath the sovereign power, concerning the future actions
of his subjects_. What verbal command of a king can arrive at the
ears of all his subjects, which it must do ere it be a law, without
the seal of the person of the commonwealth, which is here the Great
Seal of England? Who, but his Lordship, ever denied that the command
of England was a law to Englishmen? Or that any but the King had
authority to affix the Great Seal of England to any writing? And who
did ever doubt to call our laws, though made in Parliament, the
King’s laws? What was ever called a law, which the King did not
assent to? Because the King has granted in divers cases not to make
a law without the advice and assent of the lords and commons,
therefore when there is no parliament in being, shall the Great Seal
of England stand for nothing? What was more unjustly maintained
during the Long Parliament, besides the resisting and murdering of
the King, than this doctrine of his Lordship’s? But the Bishop
endeavoured here to make the multitude believe I maintain, that the
King sinneth not, though he bid hang a man for making his apparel
otherwise than he appointed, or his servant for negligent
attendance. And yet he knew I distinguished always between the
King’s natural and politic capacity. What name should I give to this
wilful slander? But here his Lordship enters into passion, and
exclaims: _Where are we, in Europe or in Asia? Gross, palpable,
pernicious flattery, poisoning of a commonwealth, poisoning the
King’s mind._ But where was his Lordship when he wrote this? One
would not think he was in France, nor that this doctrine was written
in the year 1658, but rather in the year 1648, in some cabal of the
King’s enemies. But what did put him into this fit of choler?
Partly, this very thing, that he could not answer my reasons; but
chiefly, that he had lost upon me so much School-learning in our
controversy touching _Liberty and Necessity_: wherein he was to
blame himself, for believing that the obscure and barbarous language
of School-divinity, could satisfy an ingenuous reader, as well as
plain and perspicuous English. Do I flatter the King? Why am I not
rich? I confess his Lordship has not flattered him here.

_J. D._ Something there is which he hath a confused glimmering of,
as the blind man sees _men walking like trees_, which he is not able
to apprehend and express clearly. We acknowledge, that though the
laws or commands of a sovereign prince be erroneous, or unjust, or
injurious, such as a subject cannot approve for good in themselves;
yet he is bound to acquiesce, and may not oppose or resist,
otherwise than by prayers and tears, and at the most by flight. We
acknowledge that the civil laws have power to bind the conscience of
a Christian, in themselves, but not from themselves, but from him
who hath said, _Let every soul be subject to the higher powers_.
Either they bind Christian subjects to do their sovereign’s
commands, or to suffer for the testimony of a good conscience. We
acknowledge that in doubtful cases, _semper præsumitur pro rege et
lege_, the sovereign and the law are always presumed to be in the
right. But in plain evident cases, which admit no doubt, it is
always better to obey God than man. Blunderers, whilst they think to
mend one imaginary hole, make two or three real ones. They who
derive the authority of the Scriptures or God’s law from the civil
laws of men, are like those who seek to underprop the heavens from
falling, with a bulrush. Nay, they derive not only the authority of
the Scripture, but even the law of nature itself, from the civil
law. _The laws of nature_ (which need no promulgation) _in the
condition of nature are not properly laws, but qualities which
dispose men to peace and obedience. When a commonwealth is once
settled, then are they actually laws, and not before._ God help us,
into what times are we fallen, when the immutable laws of God and
nature are made to depend upon the mutable laws of mortal men, just
as one should go about to control the sun by the authority of the
clock.

_T. H._ Hitherto he never offered to mend any of the doctrines he
inveighs against; but here he does. He says I have a glimmering of
something I was not able to apprehend and express clearly. Let us
see his Lordship’s more clear expression. _We acknowledge_, saith
he, _that though the laws or commands of a sovereign prince be
erroneous, or unjust, or injurious, such as a subject cannot approve
for good in themselves, yet he is bound to acquiesce, and may not
oppose or resist otherwise than by prayers and tears, and at the
most by flight_. Hence it follows clearly, that when a sovereign has
made a law, though erroneous, then, if his subject oppose it, it is
a sin. Therefore I would fain know, when a man has broken that law
by doing what it forbad, or by refusing to do what it commanded,
whether he have opposed this law or not. If to break the law be to
oppose it, he granteth it. Therefore his Lordship has not here
expressed himself so clearly, as to make men understand the
difference between breaking a law and opposing it. Though there be
some difference between breaking of a law, and opposing those that
are sent with force to see it executed; yet between breaking and
opposing the law itself, there is no difference. Also, though the
subject think the law just, as when a thief is by law condemned to
die, yet he may lawfully oppose the execution, not only by prayers,
tears, and flight, but also (as I think) any way he can. For though
his fault were never so great, yet his endeavour to save his own
life is not a fault. For the law expects it, and for that cause
appointeth felons to be carried bound and encompassed with armed men
to execution. Nothing is opposite to law, but sin: nothing opposite
to the sheriff, but force. So that his Lordship’s sight was not
sharp enough to see the difference between the law and the officer.
Again, _We acknowledge_, says he, _that the laws have power to bind
the conscience of a Christian in themselves, but not from
themselves_. Neither do the Scriptures bind the conscience because
they are Scriptures, but because they were from God. So also the
book of English Statutes bindeth our consciences in itself, but not
from itself, but from the authority of the king, who only in the
right of God has the legislative powers. Again he saith, _We
acknowledge that in doubtful cases, the sovereign and the law are
always presumed to be in the right_. If he presume they are in the
right, how dare he presume that the cases they determine are
doubtful? _But_, saith he, _in evident cases which admit no doubt,
it is always better to obey God than man_. Yes, and in doubtful
cases also, say I. But not always better to obey the inferior
pastors than the supreme pastor, which is the king. But what are
those cases that admit no doubt? I know but very few, and those are
such as his Lordship was not much acquainted with.

_J. D._ But it is not worthy of my labour, nor any part of my
intention, to pursue every shadow of a question which he springeth.
It shall suffice to gather a posy of flowers (or rather a bundle of
weeds) out of his writings, and present them to the reader, who will
easily distinguish them from healthful plants by the rankness of
their smell. Such are these which follow.

_T. H._ As for the following posy of flowers, there wants no more to
make them sweet, than to wipe off the venom blown upon some of them
by his Lordship’s breath.

_J. D._ 1. _To be delighted in the imagination only of being
possessed of another man’s goods, servants, or wife, without any
intention to take them from him by force or fraud, is no breach of
the law which saith: Thou shalt not covet._

_T. H._ What man was there ever, whose imagination of anything he
thought would please him, was not some delight? Or what sin is
there, where there is not so much as an intention to do injustice?
But his Lordship would not distinguish between delight and purpose,
nor between a wish and a will. This was venom. I believe that his
Lordship himself, even before he was married, took some delight in
the thought of it, and yet the woman then was not his own. All love
is delight, but all love is not sin. Without this love of that which
is not yet a man’s own, the world had not been peopled.

_J. D._ 2. _If a man by the terror of present death be compelled to
do a fact against the law, he is totally excused, because no law can
oblige a man to abandon his own preservation; nature compelleth him
to the fact._ The like doctrine he hath elsewhere. _When the actor
doth anything against the law of nature by the command of the
author, if he be obliged by former covenants to obey him, not he,
but the author breaketh the law of nature._

_T. H._ The second flower is both sweet and wholesome.

_J. D._ 3. _It is a doctrine repugnant to civil society, that
whatsoever a man does against his conscience, is sin._

_T. H._ It is plain, that to do what a man thinks in his own
conscience to be sin, is sin; for it is a contempt of the law
itself; and from thence ignorant men, out of an erroneous
conscience, disobey the law, which is pernicious to all government.

_J. D._ 4. _The kingdom of God is not shut but to them that sin,
that is, to them who have not performed due obedience to the laws of
God; nor to them, if they believe the necessary articles of the
Christian faith._

5. _We must know that the true acknowledging of sin is repentance
itself._

6. _An opinion publicly appointed to be taught cannot be heresy; nor
the sovereign princes that authorized the same, heretics._

_T. H._ The fourth, fifth, and sixth smell well. But to say, that
the sovereign prince in England is a heretic, or that an act of
parliament is heretical, stinks abominably; as it was thought _primo
Elizabethæ_.

_J. D._ 7. _Temporal and spiritual government are but two words to
make men see double, and mistake their lawful sovereign, &c. There
is no other government in this life, neither of state nor religion,
but temporal._

8. _It is manifest, that they, who permit a contrary doctrine to
that which themselves believe and think necessary_ (to salvation),
_do against their consciences, and will, as much as in them lieth,
the eternal destruction of their subjects_.

_T. H._ The seventh and eighth are roses and jessamine. But his
leaving out the words (_to salvation_) was venom.

_J. D._ 9. _Subjects sin if they do not worship God according to the
laws of the commonwealth._

_T. H._ The ninth he hath poisoned, and made it not mine. He quotes
my book _De Cive_, cap. XV. 19, where I say, _regnante Deo per solam
rationem naturalem_, that is, _before the Scripture was given_, they
sinned that refused to worship God, according to the rites and
ceremonies of the country; which hath no ill scent, but to undutiful
subjects.

_J. D._ 10. _To believe in Jesus (in Jesum), is the same as to
believe that Jesus is Christ._

_T. H._ And so it is always in the Scripture.

_J. D._ 11. _There can be no contradiction between the laws of God,
and the laws of a Christian commonwealth._ Yet, we see Christian
commonwealths daily contradict one another.

_T. H._ The eleventh is also good. But his Lordship’s instance,
_that Christian commonwealths contradict one another_, has nothing
to do here. Their laws do indeed contradict one another, but
contradict not the law of God. For God commands their subjects to
obey them in all things, and his Lordship himself confesseth that
their laws, though erroneous, bind the conscience. But Christian
commonwealths would seldom contradict one another, if they made no
doctrine law, but such as were necessary to salvation.

_J. D._ 12. _No man giveth but with intention of some good to
himself. Of all voluntary acts, the object is to every man his own
good._ Moses, St. Paul, and the Decii were not of his mind.

_T. H._ That which his Lordship adds to the twelfth, namely, that
Moses, St. Paul, and the Decii were not of my mind, is false. For
the two former did what they did for a good to themselves, which was
eternal life; and the Decii for a good fame after death. And his
Lordship also, if he had believed there is an eternal happiness to
come, or thought a good fame after death to be anything worth, would
have directed all his actions towards them, and have despised the
wealth and titles of the present world.

_J. D._ 13. _There is no natural knowledge of man’s estate after
death, much less of reward which is then to be given to breach of
faith, but only a belief grounded upon other men’s saying, that they
know it supernaturally, or that they know those that knew them that
knew others that knew it supernaturally._

_T. H._ The thirteenth is good and fresh.

_J. D._ 14. _David’s killing of Uriah was no injury to Uriah;
because the right to do what he pleased, was given him by Uriah
himself._

_T. H._ David himself makes this good, in saying, _to thee only have
I sinned_.

_J. D._ 15. _To whom it belongeth to determine controversies which
may arise from the divers interpretations of Scripture, he hath an
imperial power over all men, which acknowledge the Scripture to be
the word of God._

16. _What is theft, what is murder, what is adultery, and
universally what is an injury, is known by the civil law, that is,
by the commands of the sovereign._

_T. H._ For the fifteenth, he should have disputed it with the head
of the church. And as to the sixteenth, I would have asked him by
what other law his Lordship would have it determined what is theft,
or what is injury, than by the laws made in parliament, or by the
laws which distinguish between _meum_ and _tuum_? His Lordship’s
ignorance smells rankly ('tis his own phrase in this and many other
places, which I have let pass) of his own interest. The King tells
us what is sin, in that he tells us what is law. He hath authorized
the clergy to dehort the people from sin, and to exhort them, by
good motives both from Scripture and reason, to obey the laws; and
supposeth them (though under forty years old), by the help they have
in the university, able, in case the law be not written, to teach
the people, old and young, what they ought to follow in doubtful
cases of conscience; that is to say, they are authorized to expound
the laws of nature; but not so as to make it a doubtful case,
whether the King’s laws be to be obeyed or not. All they ought to
do, is from the King’s authority. And therefore this my doctrine is
no weed.

_J. D._ 17. He admitteth incestuous _copulations_ of the heathens,
_according to their heathenish laws, to have been lawful marriages_.
Though the Scripture teach us (Levit. xviii. 28) expressly, that for
those abominations the land of Canaan spued out her inhabitants.

_T. H._ The seventeenth he hath corrupted with a false
interpretation of the text. For in that chapter, from the beginning
to verse twenty, are forbidden marriages in certain degrees of
kindred. From verse twenty, which begins with _Moreover_, to the
twenty-eighth, are forbidden sacrificing of children to Moloch, and
profaning of God’s name, and buggery with man and beast, with this
cause expressed, (_For all these abominations have the men of the
land done which were before you, and the land is defiled_,) _that
the land spue not you out also_. As for marriages within the degrees
prohibited, they are not referred to the abominations of the
heathen. Besides, for some time after Adam, such marriages were
necessary.

_J. D._ 18. _I say that no other article of faith besides this, that
Jesus is Christ, is necessary to a Christian man for salvation._

19. _Because Christ’s kingdom is not of this world, therefore
neither can his ministers, unless they be kings, require obedience
in his name. They have no right of commanding, no power to make
laws._

_T. H._ These two smell comfortably, and of Scripture. The contrary
doctrine smells of ambition and encroachment of jurisdiction, or
rump of the Roman tyranny.

_J. D._ 20. I pass by his errors about oaths, about vows, about the
resurrection, about the kingdom of Christ, about the power of the
keys, binding, loosing, excommunication, &c., his ignorant mistakes
of _meritum congrui_ and _condigni_, active and passive obedience,
and many more, for fear of being tedious to the reader.

_T. H._ The terms of School divinity, of which number are _meritum
congrui_, _meritum condigni_, and _passive obedience_, are so
obscure, as no man living can tell what they mean; so that they that
use them may admit or deny their meaning, as it shall serve their
turns. I said not that this was their meaning, but that I thought it
was so. For no man living can tell what a Schoolman means by his
words. Therefore I expounded them according to their true
signification. Merit _ex condigno_, is when a thing is deserved by
pact; as when I say the labourer is worthy of his hire, I mean
_meritum ex condigno_. But when a man of his own grace throweth
money among the people, with an intention that what part soever of
it any of them could catch he should have, he that catcheth merits
it, not by pact, nor by precedent merit, as a labourer, but because
it was congruent to the purpose of him that cast it amongst them. In
all other meaning these words are but jargon, which his Lordship had
learnt by rote. Also _passive obedience_ signifies nothing, except
it may be called _passive obedience_ when a man refraineth himself
from doing what the law hath forbidden. For in his Lordship’s sense,
the thief that is hanged for stealing, hath fulfilled the law; which
I think is absurd.

_J. D._ His whole works are a heap of mis-shapen errors, and absurd
paradoxes, vented with the confidence of a juggler, the brags of a
mountebank, and the authority of some Pythagoras, or third Cato,
lately dropped down from heaven.

Thus we have seen how the Hobbian principles do destroy the
existence, the simplicity, the ubiquity, the eternity, and
infiniteness of God, the doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, the
hypostatical union, the kingly, sacerdotal, and prophetical office
of Christ, the being and operation of the Holy Ghost, heaven, hell,
angels, devils, the immortality of the soul, the Catholic and all
national churches; the holy Scriptures, holy orders, the holy
sacraments, the whole frame of religion, and the worship of God; the
laws of nature, the reality of goodness, justice, piety, honesty,
conscience, and all that is sacred. If his disciples have such an
implicit faith, that they can digest all these things, they may feed
with _ostriches_.

_T. H._ He here concludes his first chapter with bitter reproaches,
to leave in his reader, as he thought, a sting; supposing perhaps
that he will read nothing but the beginning and end of his book, as
is the custom of many men. But to make him lose that petty piece of
cunning, I must desire of the reader one of these two things. Either
that he would read with it the places of my _Leviathan_ which he
cites, and see not only how he answers my arguments, but also what
the arguments are which he produceth against them; or else, that he
would forbear to condemn me, so much as in his thought: for
otherwise he is unjust. The name of Bishop is of great authority;
but these words are not the words of a bishop, but of a passionate
Schoolman, too fierce and unseemly in any man whatsoever. Besides,
they are untrue. Who that knows me, will say that I have the
confidence of a juggler, or that I use to brag of anything, much
less that I play the mountebank? What my works are, he was no fit
judge. But now he has provoked me, I will say thus much of them,
that neither he, (if he had lived), nor I, if I would, could
extinguish the light which is set up in the world by the greatest
part of them: and for these doctrines which he impugneth, I have few
opposers, but such whose profit, or whose fame in learning is
concerned in them. He accuses me first of destroying the existence
of God; that is to say, he would make the world believe I were an
atheist. But upon what ground? Because I say, that God is a spirit,
but _corporeal_. But to say that, is allowed me by St. Paul, that
says (1 Cor. xv. 44): _There is a spiritual body, and there is an
animal body_. He that holds there is a God, and that God is really
somewhat, (for _body_ is doubtlessly a _real substance_), is as far
from being an atheist, as it is possible to be. But he that says God
is an _incorporeal substance_, no man can be sure whether he be an
atheist or not. For no man living can tell whether there be any
_substance_ at all, that is not also _corporeal_. For neither the
word _incorporeal_, nor _immaterial_, nor any word equivalent to it,
is to be found in Scripture, or in reason. But on the contrary, that
_the Godhead dwelleth bodily in Christ_, is found in Colos. ii. 9;
and Tertullian maintains that God is either a _corporeal substance_
or _nothing_. Nor was he ever condemned for it by the church. For
why? Not only Tertullian, but all the learned, call _body_, not only
that which one can see, but also whatsoever has magnitude, or that
is somewhere; for they had greater reverence for the divine
substance, than that they durst think it had no _magnitude_, or was
_nowhere_. But they that hold God to be a phantasm, as did the
exorcists in the Church of Rome, that is, such a thing as were at
that time thought to be the sprights, that were said to walk in
churchyards and to be the souls of men buried, do absolutely make
God to be nothing at all. But how? Were they atheists? No. For
though by ignorance of the consequence they said that which was
equivalent to atheism, yet in their hearts they thought God a
substance, and would also, if they had known what _substance_ and
what _corporeal_ meant, have said he was a corporeal substance. So
that this _atheism by consequence_ is a very easy thing to be fallen
into, even by the most godly men of the church. He also that says
that God is _wholly here_, and _wholly there_, and _wholly every
where_, destroys by consequence the unity of God, and the
infiniteness of God, and the simplicity of God. And this the
Schoolmen do, and are therefore _atheists by consequence_, and yet
they do not all say in their hearts that there is no God. So also
his Lordship by exempting the will of man from being subject to the
necessity of God’s will or decree, denies by _consequence_ the
Divine prescience, which also will amount to _atheism by
consequence_. But out of this, that God is a _spirit corporeal_ and
_infinitely pure_, there can no unworthy or dishonourable
consequence be drawn.

Thus far to his Lordships first chapter, in justification of my
_Leviathan_ as to matter of religion; and especially to wipe off
that unjust slander cast upon me by the Bishop of Derry. As for the
second chapter, which concerns my civil doctrines, since my errors
there, if there be any, will not tend very much to my disgrace, I
will not take the pains to answer it.

Whereas his Lordship has talked in his discourse here and there
ignorantly of heresy, and some others have not doubted to say
publicly, that there be many heresies in my _Leviathan_; I will add
hereunto, for a general answer, an historical relation concerning
the word Heresy, from the first use of it amongst the Grecians till
this present time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                   AN
                          HISTORICAL NARRATION
                               CONCERNING
                                HERESY,

                                AND

                      THE PUNISHMENT THEREOF.

                                -------

        “Nam veluti pueri trepidant, atque omnia cæcis
        In tenebris metuunt: sic nos in luce timemus
        Interdum, nihilo quæ sunt metuenda magis, quam
        Quæ pueri in tenebris pavitant, finguntque futura.”
                     LUCRETIUS, Lib. II. 54-57.




             HÆRESEɷS LARVAS, SECTARUM IMMANIA MONSTRA
                 HOBBIUS INVICTO DISPULIT INGENIO.




                         CONCERNING HERESY,
                                AND

                      THE PUNISHMENT THEREOF.

                             --------------

The word _heresy_ is Greek, and signifies a taking of any thing, and
particularly the taking of an opinion. After the study of philosophy
began in Greece, and the philosophers, disagreeing amongst
themselves, had started many questions, not only about things
natural, but also moral and civil; because every man took what
opinion he pleased, each several opinion was called a _heresy_;
which signified no more than a private opinion, without reference to
truth or falsehood. The beginners of these heresies were chiefly
Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, Zeno; men, who as they held
many errors, so also found they out many true and useful doctrines,
in all kinds of learning: and for that cause were well esteemed of
by the greatest personages of their own times; and so also were some
few of their followers.

But the rest, ignorant men, and very often needy knaves, having
learned by heart the opinions of these admired philosophers, and
pretending to take after them, made use thereof to get their living
by the teaching of rich men’s children that happened to be in love
with those great names: though by their impertinent discourse,
sordid and ridiculous manners, they were generally despised, of what
sect or heresy soever; whether they were Pythagoreans; or Academics,
followers of Plato; or Peripatetics, followers of Aristotle;
Epicureans; or Stoics, followers of Zeno. For these were the names
of heresies, or, as the Latins call them, _sects, a sequendo_, so
much talked of from after the time of Alexander till this present
day, and that have perpetually troubled or deceived the people with
whom they lived, and were never more numerous than in the time of
the primitive church.

The heresy of Aristotle, by the revolutions of time, has had the
good fortune to be predominant over the rest. However, originally
the name of _heresy_ was no disgrace, nor the word _heretic_ at all
in use: though the several sects, especially the Epicureans and the
Stoics, hated one another; and the Stoics, being the fiercer men,
used to revile those that differed from them, with the most
despiteful words they could invent.

It cannot be doubted, but that, by the preaching of the apostles and
disciples of Christ, in Greece and other parts of the Roman empire
full of these philosophers, many thousands of men were converted to
the Christian faith, some really, and some feignedly, for factious
ends, or for need; for Christians lived then in common, and were
charitable. And because most of these philosophers had better skill
in disputing and oratory than the common people, and thereby were
better qualified both to defend and propagate the Gospel, there is
no doubt, I say, but most of the pastors of the primitive church
were for that reason chosen out of the number of these philosophers;
who retaining still many doctrines which they had taken up on the
authority of their former masters, whom they had in reverence,
endeavoured many of them to draw the Scriptures every one to his own
heresy. And thus at first entered heresy into the church of Christ.
Yet these men were all of them Christians; as they were, when they
were first baptized. Nor did they deny the authority of those
writings which were left them by the Apostles and Evangelists,
though they interpreted them, many times, with a bias to their
former philosophy. And this dissention amongst themselves, was a
great scandal to the unbelievers, and which not only obstructed the
way of the Gospel, but also drew scorn and greater persecution upon
the church.

For remedy whereof, the chief pastors of churches did use, at the
rising of any new opinion, to assemble themselves for the examining
and determining of the same. Wherein, if the author of the opinion
were convinced of his error, and subscribed to the sentence of the
church assembled, then all was well again: but if he still persisted
in it, they laid him aside, and considered him but as an heathen
man; which to an unfeigned Christian, was a great ignominy, and of
force to make him consider better of his own doctrine; and sometimes
brought him to the acknowledgment of the truth. But other punishment
they could inflict none; that being a right appropriated to the
civil power. So that all the punishment the church could inflict,
was only ignominy; and that among the faithful, consisting in this,
that his company was by all the godly avoided, and he himself
branded with the name of _heretic_, in opposition to the whole
church, that condemned his doctrine. So that _catholic_ and
_heretic_ were terms relative; and here it was that _heretic_ came
to be a name, and a name of disgrace, both together.

The first and most troublesome heresies of the primitive church,
were about the Trinity. For, according to the usual curiosity of
natural philosophers, they could not abstain from disputing the very
first principles of Christianity, into which they were baptized, _in
the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost_. Some there
were that made them allegorical. Others would make one creator of
good, and another of evil; which was in effect to set up two Gods,
one contrary to another; supposing that causation of evil could not
be attributed to God, without impiety. From which doctrine they are
not far distant, that now make the first cause of sinful actions to
be every man as to his own sin. Others there were, that would have
God to be a body with parts organical, as face, hands, fore-parts,
and back-parts. Others, that Christ had no real body, but was a mere
phantasm: for phantasms were taken then, and have been ever since,
by unlearned and superstitious men, for things real and subsistent.
Others denied the divinity of Christ. Others, that Christ, being God
and man, was two persons. Others confessed he was one person, and
withal that he had but one nature. And a great many other heresies
arose from the too much adherence to the philosophy of those times:
whereof some were suppressed for a time by St. John’s publishing his
Gospel, and some by their own unreasonableness vanished, and some
lasted till the time of Constantine the Great, and after.

When Constantine the Great, made so by the assistance and valour of
the Christian soldiers, had attained to be the only Roman Emperor,
he also himself became a Christian, and caused the temples of the
heathen gods to be demolished, and authorised Christian religion
only to be public. But towards the latter end of his time, there
arose a dispute in the city of Alexandria, between Alexander the
Bishop, and Arius, a presbyter of the same city; wherein Arius
maintained, first, that Christ was inferior to his Father; and
afterwards, that he was no God, alleging the words of Christ, _my
Father is greater than I_: the bishop, on the contrary, alleging the
words of St. John, _and the word was God_; and the words of St.
Thomas, _my Lord and my God_. This controversy presently, amongst
the inhabitants and soldiers of Alexandria, became a quarrel, and
was the cause of much bloodshed in and about the city; and was
likely then to spread further, as afterwards it did. This so far
concerned the Emperor’s civil government, that he thought it
necessary to call a general council of all the bishops and other
eminent divines throughout the Roman Empire, to meet at the city of
Nice. When they were assembled, they presented the Emperor with
libels of accusation one against another. When he had received these
libels into his hands, he made an oration to the fathers assembled,
exhorting them to agree, and to fall in hand with the settlement of
the articles of faith, for which cause he had assembled them;
saying, whatsoever they should decree therein, he would cause to be
observed. This may perhaps seem a greater indifferency, than would
in these days be approved of. But so it is in the history; and the
articles of faith necessary to salvation, were not thought then to
be so many as afterwards they were defined to be by the Church of
Rome.

When Constantine had ended his oration, he caused the aforesaid
libels to be cast into the fire, as became a wise king and a
charitable Christian. This done, the fathers fell in hand with their
business, and following the method of a former creed, now commonly
called _the Apostles' Creed_, made a confession of faith, _viz._: I
BELIEVE IN ONE GOD, THE FATHER ALMIGHTY, MAKER OF HEAVEN AND EARTH,
AND OF ALL THINGS VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE: in which is condemned the
polytheism of the Gentiles: AND IN ONE LORD JESUS CHRIST, THE ONLY
BEGOTTEN SON OF GOD: against the many sons of the many Gods of the
heathen: BEGOTTEN OF HIS FATHER BEFORE ALL WORLDS, GOD OF GOD:
against the Arians: VERY GOD OF VERY GOD: against the Valentinians,
and against the heresy of Apelles and others, who made Christ a mere
phantasm: LIGHT OF LIGHT: this was put in for explication, and used
before to that purpose by Tertullian: BEGOTTEN, NOT MADE, BEING OF
ONE SUBSTANCE WITH THE FATHER: in this again they condemn the
doctrine of Arius. For this word, _of one substance_, in Latin
_consubstantialis_, but in Greek ὁμοούσιος, that is, _of one
essence_, was put as a touchstone to discern an Arian from a
Catholic; and much ado there was about it. Constantine himself, at
the passing of this creed, took notice of it for a hard word; but
yet approved of it, saying, that in a divine mystery it was fit to
use _divina et arcana verba_; that is, divine words, and hidden from
human understanding: calling that word ὁμοούσιος, divine, not
because it was in the divine Scripture, (for it is not there) but
because it was to him _arcanum_, that is, not sufficiently
understood. _And in this again appeared the indifferency of the
Emperor, and that he had for his end, in the calling of the Synod,
not so much the truth, as the uniformity of the doctrine, and peace
of his people that depended on it._ The cause of the obscurity of
this word ὁμοούσιος, proceeded chiefly from the difference between
the Greek and Roman dialect, in the philosophy of the Peripatetics.
The first principle of religion in all nations, is, _that God is_,
that is to say, that God really is something, and not a mere fancy;
but that which is really something, is considerable alone by itself,
as being _somewhere_. In which sense a man is a thing real; for I
can consider him _to be_, without considering any other thing _to
be_ besides him. And for the same reason, the earth, the air, the
stars, heaven, and their parts, are all of them things real. And
because whatsoever is real here, or there, or in any place, has
dimensions, that is to say, magnitude; that which hath magnitude,
whether it be visible or invisible, finite or infinite, is called by
all the learned a _body_. It followeth, that all real things, in
that they are _somewhere_, are corporeal. On the contrary, essence,
deity, humanity, and such like names, signify nothing that can be
considered, without first considering there is an _ens_, a god, a
man, &c. So also if there be any real thing that is _white_ or
_black_, _hot_ or _cold_, the same may be considered by itself; but
whiteness, blackness, heat, coldness, cannot be considered, unless
it be first supposed that there is some real thing to which they are
attributed. These real things are called by the Latin philosophers,
_entia_, _subjecta_, _substantiæ_; and by the Greek philosophers, τὰ
ὄντα ὑποκειμενα, ὑποστάμενα. The other, which are incorporeal, are
called by the Greek philosophers, οὐσία συμβεβηχότα, φαντάσματα; but
most of the Latin philosophers used to convert οὐσία into
_substantia_, and so confound real and corporeal things with
incorporeal: which is not well; for essence and substance signify
divers things. And this mistake is received, and continues still in
these parts, in all disputes, both of philosophy and divinity; for
in truth _essentia_ signifies no more, than if we should talk
ridiculously of the _isness_ of the thing that is. BY WHOM ALL
THINGS WERE MADE. This is proved out of St. John i. 1, 2, 3, and
Heb. i. 3, and that again out of Gen. i. where God is said to create
every thing by his sole word, as when he said: _Let there be light,
and there was light_. And then, that Christ was that Word, and in
the beginning with God, may be gathered out of divers places of
Moses, David, and other of the prophets. Nor was it ever questioned
amongst Christians, except by the Arians, but that Christ was God
eternal, and his incarnation eternally decreed. But the Fathers, all
that write expositions on this creed, could not forbear to
philosophize upon it, and most of them out of the principles of
Aristotle; which are the same the Schoolmen now use; as may partly
appear by this, that many of them, amongst their treatises of
religion, have affected to publish principles of logic and physics
according to the sense of Aristotle; as Athanasius, and Damascene.
And so some later divines of note, still confound the concrete with
the abstract, _deus_ with _deitas_, _ens_ with _essentia_, _sapiens_
with _sapientia_, _æternus_ with _æternitas_. If it be for exact and
rigid truth sake, why do they not say also, that holiness is a holy
man, covetousness a covetous man, hypocrisy an hypocrite, and
drunkenness a drunkard, and the like, but that it is an error? The
Fathers agree that the Wisdom of God is the eternal Son of God, by
whom all things were made, and that he was incarnate by the Holy
Ghost, if they meant it in the abstract: for if _deitas_ abstracted
be _deus_, we make two Gods of one. This was well understood by John
Damascene, in his treatise _De Fide Orthodoxa_, which is an
exposition of the Nicene creed; where he denies absolutely that
_deitas_ is _deus_, lest seeing God was made man, it should follow,
the Deity was made man; which is contrary to the doctrine of all the
Nicene Fathers. The attributes therefore of God in the abstract,
when they are put for God, are put _metonymically_; which is a
common thing in Scripture; for example, Prov. viii. 25, where it is
said: _before the mountains were settled, before the hills, was I
brought forth_; the wisdom there spoken of, being the wisdom of God,
signifies the same with the wise God. This kind of speaking is also
ordinary in all languages. This considered, such abstracted words
ought not to be used in arguing, and especially in the deducing the
articles of our faith; though in the language of God’s eternal
worship, and in all godly discourses, they cannot be avoided; and
the creed itself is less difficult to be assented to in its own
words, than in all such expositions of the Fathers. WHO FOR US MEN
AND OUR SALVATION CAME DOWN FROM HEAVEN, AND WAS INCARNATE BY THE
HOLY GHOST OF THE VIRGIN MARY, AND WAS MADE MAN. I have not read of
any exception to this; for where Athanasius in his creed says of the
Son, _He was not made, but begotten_, it is to be understood of the
Son as he was God eternal; whereas here it is spoken of the Son as
he is man. And of the Son, also as he was man, it may be said he was
begotten of the Holy Ghost; for a woman conceiveth not, but of him
that begetteth; which is also confirmed, (Matth. i. xx): _That which
is begotten in her_, (τὸ γενεθεν), _is of the Holy Ghost_. AND WAS
ALSO CRUCIFIED FOR US UNDER PONTIUS PILATE: HE SUFFERED AND WAS
BURIED: AND THE THIRD DAY HE ROSE AGAIN ACCORDING TO THE SCRIPTURES,
AND ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN, AND SITTETH ON THE RIGHT HAND OF THE
FATHER: AND HE SHALL COME AGAIN WITH GLORY TO JUDGE BOTH THE QUICK
AND THE DEAD. WHOSE KINGDOM SHALL HAVE NO END. Of this part of the
creed I have not met with any doubt made by any Christian. Hither
the Council of Nice proceeded in their general confession of faith,
and no further.

This finished, some of the bishops present at the Council
(seventeen or eighteen, whereof Eusebius Bishop of Cæsarea was
one) not sufficiently satisfied, refused to subscribe till this
doctrine of ὁμοούσιος should be better explained. Thereupon the
Council decreed, that whosoever shall say that God hath parts,
shall be anathematized; to which the said bishops subscribed. And
Eusebius, by order of the Council, wrote a letter, the copies
whereof were sent to every absent bishop, that being satisfied
with the reason of their subscribing, they also should subscribe.
The reason they gave of their subscription was this, _that they
had now a form of words prescribed, by which, as a rule, they
might guide themselves so, as not to violate the peace of the
church_. By this it is manifest, that no man was an heretic, but
he that in plain and direct words contradicted that form by the
church prescribed, and that no man could be made _an heretic by
consequence_. And because the said form was not put into the body
of the creed, but directed only to the bishops, there was no
reason to punish any lay-person that should speak to the contrary.

But what was the meaning of this doctrine, _that God has no parts_?
Was it made heresy to say, that God, who is a real substance, cannot
be considered or spoken of as _here_ or _there_, or any where, which
are parts of places? Or that there is any real thing without length
every way, that is to say, which hath no magnitude at all, finite,
nor infinite? Or is there any whole substance, whose two halves or
three thirds are not the same with that whole? Or did they mean to
condemn the argument of Tertullian, by which he confuted Apelles and
other heretics of his time, namely, _whatsoever was not corporeal,
was nothing but phantasm, and not corporeal_, for heretical? No,
certainly, no divines say that. They went to establish the doctrine
of _one individual God in Trinity_; to abolish the diversity of
species in God, not the distinction of _here_ and _there_ in
substance. When St. Paul asked the Corinthians, _Is Christ divided_,
he did not think they thought him impossible to be considered as
having hands and feet, but that they might think him, according to
the manner of the Gentiles, one of the sons of God, as Arius did;
but not the only-begotten Son of God. And thus also it is expounded
in the Creed of Athanasius, who was present in that council, by
these words, _not confounding the persons, nor dividing the
substances_; that is to say, that God is not divided into three
persons, as man is divided into Peter, James, and John; nor are the
three persons one and the same person. But Aristotle, and from him
all the Greek Fathers, and other learned men, when they distinguish
the general latitude of a word, they call it division; as when they
divide _animal_ into man and beast, they call these εἴδη, _species_;
and when they again divide the _species_ man into Peter and John,
they call these μίρη, _partes individuæ_. And by this confounding
the division of the substance with the distinction of words, divers
men have been led into the error of attributing to God a name, which
is not the name of any substance at all, _viz._ _incorporeal_.

By these words, _God has no parts_, thus explained, together with
the part of the _creed_ which was at that time agreed on, many of
those heresies which were antecedent to that first general Council,
were condemned; as that of Manes, who appeared about thirty years
before the reign of Constantine, by the first article, _I believe in
one God_; though in other words it seems to me to remain still in
the doctrine of the church of Rome, which so ascribeth a liberty of
the will to men, as that their will and purpose to commit sin,
should not proceed from the cause of all things, God; but originally
from themselves or from the Devil. It may seem perhaps to some, that
by the same words the Anthropomorphites also were then condemned:
and certainly, if by parts were meant not persons individual, but
pieces, they were condemned: for face, arms, feet, and the like, are
pieces. But this cannot be, for the Anthropomorphites appeared not
till the time of Valens the Emperor, which was after the Council of
Nice between forty and fifty years; and were not condemned till the
second general Council at Constantinople.

Now for the punishment of heretics ordained by Constantine, we read
of none; but that ecclesiastical officers, bishops and other
preachers, if they refused to subscribe to this faith, or taught the
contrary doctrine, were for the first fault deprived of their
offices, and for the second banished. And thus did heresy, which at
first was the name of private opinion, and no crime, by virtue of a
law of the Emperor, made only for the peace of the church, become a
crime in a pastor, and punishable with deprivation first, and next
with banishment.

After this part of the creed was thus established, there arose
presently many new heresies, partly about the interpretation of it,
and partly about the Holy Ghost, of which the Nicene Council had not
determined. Concerning the part established, there arose disputes
about the nature of Christ, and the word _hypostasis_, _id est_,
substance; for of persons there was yet no mention made, the creed
being written in Greek, in which language there is no word that
answereth to the Latin word _persona_. And the union, as the Fathers
called it, of the human and Divine nature in Christ, _hypostatical_,
caused Eutyches, and after him Dioscorus, to affirm, there was but
one nature in Christ; thinking that whensoever two things are
united, they are one: and this was condemned as Arianism in the
Councils of Constantinople and Ephesus. Others, because they thought
two living and rational substances, such as are God and man, must
needs be also two _hypostases_, maintained that Christ had two
_hypostases_: but these were two heresies condemned together. Then
concerning the Holy Ghost, Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, and
some others, denied the divinity thereof. And whereas about seventy
years before the Nicene Council, there had been holden a provincial
Council at Carthage, wherein it was decreed, that those Christians
which in the persecutions had denied the faith of Christ, should not
be received again into the church unless they were again baptized:
this also was condemned, though the President in that Council was
that most sincere and pious Christian, Cyprian. And at last the
creed was made up entire as we have it, in the Chalcedonian Council,
by addition of these words: AND I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST, THE
LORD AND GIVER OF LIFE, WHO PROCEEDETH FROM THE FATHER AND THE SON.
WHO WITH THE FATHER AND THE SON TOGETHER IS WORSHIPPED AND
GLORIFIED. WHO SPAKE BY THE PROPHETS. AND I BELIEVE ONE CATHOLIC AND
APOSTOLIC CHURCH. I ACKNOWLEDGE ONE BAPTISM FOR THE REMISSION OF
SINS. AND I LOOK FOR THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD, AND THE LIFE OF
THE WORLD TO COME. In this addition are condemned, first the
Nestorians and others, in these words: WHO WITH THE FATHER AND THE
SON TOGETHER IS WORSHIPPED AND GLORIFIED: and secondly, the doctrine
of the Council of Carthage, in these words: I BELIEVE ONE BAPTISM
FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS. For one baptism is not there put as
opposite to several sorts or manners of baptism, but to the
iteration of it. St. Cyprian was a better Christian than to allow
any baptism that was not in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. In the general confession of faith contained in the creed
called the Nicene Creed, there is no mention of _hypostasis_, nor of
hypostatical union, nor of corporeal, nor of incorporeal, nor of
parts; the understanding of which words being not required of the
vulgar, but only of the pastors, whose disagreement else might
trouble the church; nor were such points necessary to salvation, but
set abroach for ostentation of learning, or else to dazzle men, with
design to lead them towards some ends of their own. The changes of
prevalence in the empire between the Catholics and the Arians, and
how the great Athanasius, the most fierce of the Catholics, was
banished by Constantine, and afterwards restored, and again
banished, I let pass; only it is to be remembered, that Athanasius
is supposed to have made his creed then, when (banished) he was in
Rome, Liberius being pope; by whom, as is most likely, the word
_hypostasis_, as it was in Athanasius’s Creed, was disliked. For the
Roman church could never be brought to receive it, but instead
thereof used their own word _persona_. But the first and last words
of that creed the church of Rome refused not: for they make every
article, not only those of the body of the creed, but all the
definitions of the Nicene Fathers to be such, as a man cannot be
saved, unless he believe them all stedfastly; though made only for
peace sake, and to unite the minds of the clergy, whose disputes
were like to trouble the peace of the empire. After these four first
general Councils, the power of the Roman church grew up apace; and,
either by the negligence or weakness of the succeeding Emperors, the
Pope did what he pleased in religion. _There was no doctrine which
tended to the power ecclesiastical, or to the reverence of the
clergy, the contradiction whereof was not by one Council or another
made heresy, and punished arbitrarily by the Emperors with
banishment or death._ And at last kings themselves, and
commonwealths, unless they purged their dominions of heretics, were
excommunicated, interdicted, and their subjects let loose upon them
by the Pope; insomuch as to an ingenuous and serious Christian,
there was nothing so dangerous as to enquire concerning his own
salvation, of the Holy Scripture; the careless cold Christian was
safe, and the skilful hypocrite a saint. But this is a story so well
known, as I need not insist upon it any longer, but proceed to the
heretics here in England, and what punishments were ordained for
them by acts of parliament. All this while the penal laws against
heretics were such, as the several princes and states, in their own
dominions, thought fit to enact. The edicts of the emperors made
their punishments capital, but for the manner of the execution, left
it to the prefects of provinces: and when other kings and states
intended, according to the laws of the Roman church, to extirpate
heretics, they ordained such punishment as they pleased. The first
law that was here made for the punishment of heretics, called
Lollards and mentioned in the Statutes, was in the fifth year of the
reign of Richard the Second, occasioned by the doctrine of John
Wickliff and his followers; which Wickliff, because no law was yet
ordained for his punishment in parliament, by the favour of John of
Gaunt, the King’s son, during the reign of Edward the Third, had
escaped. But in the fifth year of the next king, which was Richard
the Second, there passed an act of parliament to this effect: that
sheriffs and some others should have commissions to apprehend such
as were certified by the prelates to be preachers of heresy, their
fautors, maintainers, and abettors, and to hold them in strong
prison, till they should justify themselves, according to the law of
holy church. So that hitherto there was no law in England, by which
a heretic could be put to death, or otherways punished, than by
imprisoning him till he was reconciled to the church. After this, in
the next king’s reign, which was Henry the Fourth, son of John of
Gaunt, by whom Wickliff had been favoured, _and who in his aspiring
to the crown had needed the good will of the bishops_, was made a
law, in the second year of his reign, wherein it was enacted, that
every ordinary may convene before him, and imprison any person
suspected of heresy; and that an obstinate heretic shall be burnt
before the people.

In the next king’s reign, which was Henry the Fifth, in his second
year, was made an act of parliament, wherein it is declared, that
the intent of heretics, called Lollards, was to subvert the
Christian faith, the law of God, the church, and the realm: and that
an heretic convict should forfeit all his fee-simple lands, goods,
and chattels, besides the punishment of burning. Again, in the
five-and-twentieth year of King Henry the Eighth, it was enacted,
that an heretic convict shall abjure his heresies, and refusing so
to do, or relapsing, shall be burnt in open place, for example of
others. This act was made after the putting down of the Pope’s
authority: and by this it appears, that King Henry the Eighth
intended no farther alteration in religion, than the recovering of
his own right ecclesiastical. But in the first year of his son, King
Edward the Sixth, was made an act, by which were repealed not only
this act, but also all former acts concerning doctrines, or matters
of religion; so that at this time there was no law at all for the
punishment of heretics.

Again, in the Parliament of the first and second year of Queen Mary,
this act of 1 Edward VI was not repealed, but made useless, by
reviving the statute of 25 Henry VIII, and freely putting it in
execution; insomuch as it was debated, whether or no they should
proceed upon that statute against the Lady Elizabeth, the Queen’s
sister.

The Lady Elizabeth, not long after, by the death of Queen Mary,
coming to the crown, in the fifth year of her reign, by act of
Parliament repealed in the first place all the laws ecclesiastical
of Queen Mary, with all other former laws concerning the punishments
of heretics: nor did she enact any other punishments in their place.
In the second place it was enacted, that the Queen by her letters
patents should give a commission to the bishops, with certain other
persons, in her Majesty’s name, to execute the power ecclesiastical;
in which commission, the commissioners were forbidden to adjudge
anything to be heresy, which was not declared to be heresy by some
of the first four general Councils: but there was no mention made of
general Councils, but only in that branch of the act which
authorised that commission, commonly called _the High Commission_;
nor was there in that commission anything concerning how heretics
were to be punished; but it was granted to them, that they might
declare or not declare, as they pleased, to be heresy or not heresy,
any of those doctrines which had been condemned for heresy in the
first four general Councils. So that during the time that the said
High Commission was in being, there was no statute by which a
heretic could be punished otherways, than by the ordinary censures
of the church; nor doctrine accounted heresy, unless the
commissioners had actually declared and published, that all that
which was made heresy by those four Councils, should be heresy also
now: but I never heard that any such declaration was made either by
proclamation, or by recording it in churches, or by public printing,
as in penal laws is necessary; the breaches of it are excused by
ignorance. Besides, if heresy had been made capital, or otherwise
civilly punishable, either the four general Councils themselves, or
at least the points condemned in them, ought to have been printed or
put into parish churches in English, because without it, no man
could know how to beware of offending against them.

Some men may perhaps ask, whether nobody were condemned and burnt
for heresy, during the time of the High Commission.

I have heard there were: but they which approve such executions, may
peradventure know better grounds for them than I do; but those
grounds are very well worthy to be enquired after.

Lastly, in the seventeenth year of the reign of King Charles the
First, shortly after that the Scots had rebelliously put down the
episcopal government in Scotland, the Presbyterians in England
endeavoured the same here. The king, though he saw the rebels ready
to take the field, would not condescend to that; but yet in hope to
appease them, was content to pass an act of parliament for the
abolishing the High Commission. But though the High Commission was
taken away, yet the parliament having other ends besides the setting
up of the Presbyterate, pursued the rebellion, and put down both
episcopacy and monarchy, erecting a power by them called _The
Commonwealth_, by others _The Rump_, which men obeyed not out of
duty, but for fear; nor were there any human laws left in force to
restrain any man from preaching or writing any doctrine concerning
religion that he pleased. And in this heat of the war, it was
impossible to disturb the peace of the state, which then was none.

And in this time it was, that a book called _Leviathan_ was written
in defence of the King’s power, temporal and spiritual, without any
word against episcopacy, or against any bishop, or against the
public doctrine of the church. It pleased God, about twelve years
after the usurpation of this _Rump_, to restore his most gracious
Majesty that now is, to his father’s throne, and presently, his
Majesty restored the bishops, and pardoned the Presbyterians. But
then both the one and the other accused in Parliament this book of
heresy, when neither the bishops before the war had declared what
was heresy; when if they had, it had been made void by the putting
down of the High Commission at the importunity of the Presbyterians.
So fierce are men, for the most part, in dispute, where either their
learning or power is debated, that they never think of the laws, but
as soon as they are offended, they cry out, _crucifige_; forgetting
what St. Paul (2 Tim. ii. 24, 25) saith, even in case of obstinate
holding of an error: _the servant of the Lord must not strive, but
be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will
give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth_: of which
counsel, such fierceness as hath appeared in the disputation of
divines, down from before the Council of Nice to this present time,
is a violation.


                               FINIS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CONSIDERATIONS
                                UPON THE
                     REPUTATION, LOYALTY, MANNERS,
                             AND RELIGION,

                                 OF

                           THOMAS HOBBES,

                           OF MALMESBURY,

                        WRITTEN BY HIMSELF,

                             BY WAY OF

                     LETTER TO A LEARNED PERSON

                        (JOHN WALLIS, D.D.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                THE
                    BOOKSELLER'S ADVERTISEMENT.
                          TO THE READERS.


                                -------


I do here present you with a piece of Mr. Hobbes’s writing; which is
not published from an imperfect MS. as his _Dialogue of the Civil
Wars of England_ was, by some that had got accidentally a copy of
it, absolutely against his consent, as you may see by some passages
out of some of his letters to me, which I have here inserted.

In his letter of June, 1679, he saith:

“I would fain have published my _Dialogue of the Civil Wars of
England_, long ago; and to that end I presented it to his Majesty:
and some days after, when I thought he had read it, I humbly
besought him to let me print it; but his Majesty, though he heard me
graciously, yet he flatly refused to have it published. Therefore I
brought away the book, and gave you leave to take a copy of it;
which when you had done, I gave the original to an honourable and
learned friend, who about a year after died. The King knows better,
and is more concerned in publishing of books than I am: therefore I
dare not venture to appear in the business, lest it should offend
him. Therefore I pray you not to meddle in the business. Rather than
to be thought any way to further or countenance the printing, I
would be content to lose twenty times the value of what you can
expect to get, &c. I pray do not take it ill; it may be I may live
to send you somewhat else as vendible as that: and without offence,
I rest     Your very humble servant,

                                                     THOMAS HOBBES.”

_Chatsworth, June 19, 1679._

                (Part of his letter in July, 1679.)

“If I leave any MSS. worth printing, I will leave word you shall
have them, if you please. I am

                                             Your humble servant,
                                                     THOMAS HOBBES.”

_Chatsworth, July 21, 1679._

                (Part of his letter, August, 1679.)

“Sir,—I thank you for taking my advice in not stirring about the
printing of my book concerning the civil wars of England, &c. I am
writing somewhat for you to print in English, &c. I am, Sir,

                                             Your humble servant,
                                                     THOMAS HOBBES.”

_Chatsworth, Aug. 18, 1679._

That no spurious brats, for the time to come, be fathered upon the
deceased author, I have printed, _verbatim_, these passages out of
his letters written to me at several times; their original I have by
me. I will be so just to his memory, that I will not print anything
but what is perfect, and fitted for the press. And if any book shall
be printed with his name to it, that hath not before been printed,
you may be confident it is not his, unless printed for

                                                     WILLIAM CROOKE.




                           CONSIDERATIONS

                      UPON THE REPUTATION, &c.

                                 OF

                           THOMAS HOBBES.

                                -------

    SIR,

I am one of them that admire your writings; and having read over
your _Hobbius Heauton-timorumenos_, I cannot hold from giving you
some account of the causes why I admire it. And first I considered
how you handle him for his disloyalty, in these words (page 5): _His
great_ Leviathan, _wherein he placed his main strength, is now
somewhat out of season; which, upon deserting his royal master in
distress, (for he pretends to have been the King’s tutor, though
yet, from those who have most reason to know it, I can find but
little ground for such a pretence), was written in defence of
Oliver’s title, or whoever, by whatsoever means, can get to be
upmost; placing the whole right of government merely in strength,
and absolving all his Majesty’s subjects from their allegiance,
whenever he is not in a present capacity to force obedience_.

That which I observe and admire here, first, is, that you left not
this passage out, for two reasons; one, because Mr. Hobbes could
long for nothing more than such an occasion to tell the world his
own and your little stories, during the time of the late rebellion.

When the Parliament sat, that began in April 1640, and was dissolved
in May following, and in which many points of the regal power, which
were necessary for the peace of the kingdom, and the safety of his
Majesty’s person, were disputed and denied, Mr. Hobbes wrote a
little treatise in English, wherein he did set forth and
demonstrate, that the said power and rights were inseparably annexed
to the sovereignty; which sovereignty they did not then deny to be
in the King; but it seems understood not, or would not understand
that inseparability. Of this treatise, though not printed, many
gentlemen had copies, which occasioned much talk of the author; and
had not his Majesty dissolved the Parliament, it had brought him
into danger of his life.

He was the first that had ventured to write in the King’s defence;
and one, amongst very few, that upon no other ground but knowledge
of his duty and principles of equity, without special interest, was
in all points perfectly loyal.

The third of November following, there began a new Parliament,
consisting for the greatest part of such men as the people had
elected only for their averseness to the King’s interest. These
proceeded so fiercely in the very beginning, against those that had
written or preached in the defence of any part of that power, which
they also intended to take away, and in gracing those whom the King
had disgraced for sedition, that Mr. Hobbes, doubting how they would
use him, went over into France, the first of all that fled, and
there continued eleven years, to his damage some thousands of pounds
deep. This, Doctor, was your time of harvest: you were in their
favour, and that, as you have made it since appear, for no goodness.

Being at Paris, he wrote and published his book _De Cive_, in Latin,
to the end that all nations which should hear what you and your
Con-Covenanters were doing in England, might detest you, which I
believe they do; for I know no book more magnified than this is
beyond the seas.

When his Majesty, that now is, came to Paris, Mr. Hobbes had the
honour to initiate him in the mathematics; but never was so impudent
or ignorant as to call, or to think himself the King’s tutor, as
you, that understand not what that word, out of the University,
signifies, do falsely charge him with; or ever to say, that he was
one of his Majesty’s domestic servants. While upon this occasion he
staid about Paris, and had neither encouragement nor desire to
return into England, he wrote and published his _Leviathan_, far
from the intention either of disadvantage to his Majesty, or to
flatter Oliver, who was not made Protector till three or four years
after, on purpose to make way for his return. For there is scarce a
page in it that does not upbraid both him, and you, and others such
as you, with your abominable hypocrisy and villainy.

Nor did he desert his Majesty, as you falsely accuse him, as his
Majesty himself knows. Nor was his Majesty, as you unmannerly term
it, _in distress_. He had the title, right, and reverence of a King,
and maintained his faithful servants with him. It is true that Mr.
Hobbes came home, but it was because he would not trust his safety
with the French clergy.

Do you know that ever he sought any benefit either from Oliver, or
from any of his party, or was any way familiar with any of his
ministers, before or after his return; or curried favour with any of
them, as you did by dedicating a book to his vice-chancellor, Owen?

Did you ever hear that he took anything done to him by his Majesty
in evil part, or spake of him otherwise than the best of his
servants would do; or that he was sullen, silent, or sparing, in
praising his Majesty in any company, upon any occasion?

He knew who were his enemies, and upon what ground they misconstrued
his writings.

But your indiscretion appears more manifestly in giving him occasion
to repeat what you have done, and to _consider_ you, as you
professedly have considered him. For with what equity can it be
denied him to repeat your manifest and horrible crimes, for all you
have been pardoned; when you publish falsely pretended faults of
his, and comprehended in the same pardon?

If he should say and publish, that you deciphered the letters of the
King and his party, and thereby delivered his Majesty’s secrets to
the enemy, and his best friends to the scaffold, and boasted of it
in your book of arithmetic, written in Latin, to all the world, as
of a monument of your wit, worthy to be preserved in the University
Library: how will you justify yourself, if you be reproached for
having been a rebel and a traitor? It may be you, or some for you,
will now say, you deciphered those letters to the King’s advantage:
but then you were unfaithful to your masters of the Parliament: a
very honest pretence, and full of gallantry, to excuse _treason_
with _treachery_, and to be a double spy. Besides, who will believe
it? Who enabled you to do the King that favour? Why herded you with
his enemies? Who brought the King into a need of such a fellow’s
favour, but they that first deserted him, and then made war upon
him, and which were your friends and Mr. Hobbes his enemies? Nay
more, I know not one enemy Mr. Hobbes then had, but such as were
first the King’s enemies, and, because the King’s, therefore his.
Your being of that party, without your deciphering, amounts to no
more than a desertion. Of the bishops that then were, and for whose
sakes, in part, you raised the war, there was not one that followed
the King out of the land, though they loved him, but lived quietly
under the protection, first of the Parliament, and then of Oliver,
(whose titles and actions were equally unjust) without treachery. Is
not this as bad as if they had gone over, and (which was Mr. Hobbes
his case) been driven back again? I hope you will not call them all
deserters, or, because by their stay here openly they accepted of
the Parliament’s and of Oliver’s protection, defenders either of
Oliver’s or of the Parliament’s title to the sovereign power.

How many were there in that Parliament at first that did indeed and
voluntarily desert the King, in consenting to many of their unjust
actions? Many of these afterwards, either upon better judgment, or
because they pleased not the faction, (for it was a hard matter for
such as were not of Pym’s cabal to please the Parliament), or for
some other private ends deserted the Parliament, and did some of
them more hurt to the King than if they had stayed where they were;
for they had been so affrighted by such as you, with a panic fear of
tyranny, that seeking to help him by way of composition and sharing,
they abated the just and necessary indignation of his armies, by
which only his right was to be recovered.

That very entering into the Covenant with the Scottish nation
against the King, is by itself a very great crime, and you guilty of
it. And so was the imposing of the Engagement, and you guilty of
that also, as being done by the then Parliament, whose democratical
principles you approved of.

You were also assisting to the Assembly of Divines that made the
_Directory_, and which were afterwards put down by Oliver for
counterfeiting themselves ambassadors. And this was when the King
was living, and at the head of an army, which with your own
endeavour might have protected you. What crime it is, the King being
head of the Church of England, to make _Directories_, to alter the
_Church-government_, and to set up new forms of God’s service, upon
your own fancies, without the King’s authority, the lawyers could
have told you; and what punishment you were to expect from it, you
might have seen in the statute printed before the _Book of Common
Prayer_.

Further he may say, and truly, that you were guilty of all the
treasons, murders, and spoil committed by Oliver, or by any upon
Oliver’s or the Parliament’s authority: for, during the late
trouble, who made both Oliver and the people mad, but the preachers
of your principles? But besides the wickedness, see the folly of it.
You thought to make them mad, but just to such a degree as should
serve your own turn; that is to say, mad, and yet just as wise as
yourselves. Were you not very imprudent to think to govern madness?
Paul they knew, but who were you? You were they, that put the army
into Oliver’s hands, who before, as mad as he was, was too weak, and
too obscure to do any great mischief; with which army he executed
upon such as you, both here and in Scotland, that which the justice
of God required.

Therefore of all the crimes, the great one not excepted, done in
that rebellion, you were guilty; you, I say, Doctor, how little
force or wit soever you contributed, for your good-will to their
cause. The King was hunted as a partridge in the mountains; and
though the hounds have been hanged, yet the hunters were as guilty
as they, and deserved no less punishment. And the decipherers, and
all that blew the horn, are to be reckoned amongst the hunters.
Perhaps you would not have had the prey killed, but rather have kept
it tame. And yet who can tell? I have read of few kings deprived of
their power by their own subjects, that have lived any long time
after it, for reasons that every man is able to conjecture.

All this is so manifest, as it needs no witnesses. In the meantime
Mr. Hobbes his behaviour was such, that of them who appeared in that
scene, he was the only man I know, except a few that had the same
principles with him, that has not something more or less to blush
for; as having either assisted that rebellious Parliament, without
necessity (when they might have had protection from the King, if
they had resorted to him for it in the field), by covenanting, or by
action, or with money or plate, or by voting against his Majesty’s
interest, in himself or his friends; though some of them have since
by extraordinary service deserved to be received into favour; but
what is that to you? You are none of them; and yet you dare to
reproach the guiltless, as if after so ill fruits of your sermons,
it were not impudence enough to preach.

I admire further, that having been forgiven these so transcendant
crimes, so great a debt to the gallows, you take Mr. Hobbes by the
throat for a word in his _Leviathan_, made a fault by malicious or
over-hasty construction: for you have thereby, like the unmerciful
debtor in the Gospel, in my opinion, forfeited your pardon, and so,
without a new one, may be hanged yet.

To that other charge, _that he writ his Leviathan in defence of
Oliver’s title_, he will say, that you in your own conscience know
it is false. What was Oliver, when that book came forth? It was in
1650, and Mr. Hobbes returned before 1651. Oliver was then but
General under your masters of the Parliament, nor had yet cheated
them of their usurped power. For that was not done till two or three
years after, in 1653, which neither he nor you could foresee. What
title then of Oliver’s could he pretend to justify? But you will
say, he placed the right of government there, wheresoever should be
the strength; and so by consequence he placed it in Oliver. Is that
all? Then primarily his _Leviathan_ was intended for your masters of
the Parliament, because the strength was then in them. Why did they
not thank him for it, both they and Oliver in their turns? There,
Doctor, you deciphered ill. For it was written in the behalf of
those many and faithful servants and subjects of his Majesty, that
had taken his part in the war, or otherwise done their utmost
endeavour to defend his Majesty’s right and person against the
rebels: whereby, having no other means of protection, nor, for the
most part, of subsistence, they were forced to compound with your
masters, and to promise obedience for the saving of their lives and
fortunes; which in his book he hath affirmed they might lawfully do,
and consequently not lawfully bear arms against the victors. They
that had done their utmost endeavour to perform their obligation to
the King, had done all that they could be obliged unto; and were
consequently at liberty to seek the safety of their lives and
livelihood wheresoever, and without treachery. But there is nothing
in that book to justify the submission of you, or such as you, to
the Parliament, after the King’s being driven from them, or to
Oliver; for you were the King’s enemies, and cannot pretend want of
that protection which you yourselves refused, denied, fought
against, and destroyed. If a man owe you money, and you by robbing
him, or other injury, disable him to pay you, the fault is your own;
nor needs this exception, _unless the creditor rob him_, be put into
the condition of the bond. Protection and obedience are relative. He
that says a man may submit to an enemy for want of protection, can
never be construed, but that he meant it of the obedient. But let us
consider his words, when he puts for a law of nature, (vol. iii. p.
703) _that every man is bound, as much as in him lieth, to protect
in war the authority by which he is himself protected in time of
peace_; which I think is no ungodly or unreasonable principle. For
confirmation of it, he defines in what point of time it is, that a
subject becomes obliged to obey an unjust conqueror; and defines it
thus: _it is that point wherein having liberty to submit to the
conqueror, he consenteth either by express words, or by other
sufficient signs, to be his subject_.

I cannot see, Doctor, how a man can be at liberty to submit to his
new, that has not first done all he could for his old master: nor if
he have done all he could, why that liberty should be refused him.
If a man be taken by the Turk, and brought by terror to fight
against his former master, I see how he may be killed for it as an
enemy, but not as a criminal; nor can I see how he that hath liberty
to submit, can at the same time be bound not to submit.

But you will say, perhaps, that he defines the time of that liberty
to the advantage of Oliver, in that he says, _that for an ordinary
subject, it is then, when the means of his life are within the
guards and garrisons of the enemy; for it is then, that he hath no
protection but from the enemy for his contribution_. It was not
necessary for him to explain it to men of so great understanding, as
you and other his enemies pretend to be, by putting in the
exception, _unless they came into those guards and garrisons by
their own treason_. Do you think that Oliver’s party, for their
submission to Oliver, could pretend the want of that protection?

The words therefore by themselves, without that exception, do
signify no more than this; _that whosoever had done as much as in
him did lie, to protect the King in war, had liberty afterwards to
provide themselves of such protection as they could get_; which to
those whose means of life were within the guards and garrisons of
Oliver, was Oliver’s protection.

Do you think, when a battle is lost, and you at the mercy of an
enemy, it is unlawful to receive quarter with condition of
obedience? Or if you receive it on that condition, do you think it
honesty to break promise, and treacherously murder him that gave you
your life? If that were good doctrine, he were a foolish enemy that
would give quarter to any man.

You see, then, that this submission to Oliver, or to your then
masters, is allowed by Mr. Hobbes his doctrine only to the King’s
faithful party, and not to any that fought against him, howsoever
they coloured it, by saying they fought for the King and Parliament;
nor to any that writ or preached against his cause, or encouraged
his adversaries; nor to any that betrayed his counsels, or that
intercepted or deciphered any letters of his, or of his officers, or
of any of his party; nor to any that by any way had contributed to
the diminution of his Majesty’s power, ecclesiastical or civil; nor
does it absolve any of them from their allegiance. You that make it
so heinous a crime for a man to save himself from violent death, by
a forced submission to a usurper, should have considered what crime
it was to submit voluntarily to the usurping Parliament.

I can tell you besides, why those words were put into his last
chapter, which he calls the review. It happened at that time that
there were many honourable persons, that having been faithful and
unblemished servants to the King, and soldiers in his army, had
their estates then sequestered; of whom some were fled, but the
fortunes of them all were at the mercy, not of Oliver, but of the
Parliament. Some of these were admitted to composition, some not.
They that compounded, though they helped the Parliament less by
their composition, than they should have done, if they had stood
out, by their confiscation, yet they were ill-spoken of, especially
by those that had no estates to lose, nor hope to compound. And it
was for this that he added to what he had written before, this
caution, that if they would compound, they were to do it _bona
fide_, without intention of treachery. Wherein he justified their
submission by their former obedience, and present necessity; but
condemned treachery. Whereas you that pretend to abhor atheism,
condemn that which was done upon necessity, and justify the
treachery: and you had reason for it, that cannot otherwise justify
yourselves. Those strugglings which happened afterwards, lost his
Majesty many a good and able subject, and strengthened Oliver with
the confiscation of their estates; which if they had attended the
discord of their enemies, might have been saved.

Perhaps you will take for a sign of Mr. Hobbes his ill meaning, that
his Majesty was displeased with him. And truly I believe he was
displeased for a while, but not very long. They that complained of,
and misconstrued his writings, were his Majesty’s good subjects, and
reputed wise and learned men, and thereby obtained to have their
misconstruction believed for some little time: but the very next
summer after his coming away, two honourable persons of the Court,
that came over into England, assured him, that his Majesty had a
good opinion of him; and others since have told me, that his Majesty
said openly, that he thought Mr. Hobbes never meant him hurt.
Besides, his Majesty hath used him more graciously than is ordinary
to so humble a person as he is, and so great a delinquent as you
would make him; and testified his esteem of him in his bounty. What
argument now can you draw from hence more than this, that his
Majesty understood his writings better than his accusers did?

I admire in the next place, upon what ground you accuse him, and
with him all those that have approved his _Leviathan_, with atheism.
I thought once, that that slander had had some, though not firm,
ground, in that you call his a new divinity: but for that point he
will allege these words of his Leviathan (p. 438): _By which it
seemeth to me (with submission nevertheless, both in this and all
other questions whereof the determination dependeth on the
Scriptures, to the interpretation of the Bible authorized by the
commonwealth, whose subject I am), that, &c._ What is there in these
words, but modesty and obedience? But you were at this time in
actual rebellion. Mr. Hobbes, that holds religion to be a law, did
in order thereto condemn the maintenance of any of his opinions
against the law; and you that reproach him for them, upon your own
account should also have shown by your own learning, wherein the
Scripture, which was his sole proof, was miscited or misconstrued by
him; (for he submitted to the laws, that is to say, to the King’s
doctrine, not to yours); and not have insulted for the victory won
by the power of the law, to which you were then an enemy.

Another argument of atheism you take from his denying _immaterial_
or _incorporeal substances_. Let any man impartially now compare his
religion with yours, by this very measure, and judge which of the
two savours most of atheism.

It is by all Christians confessed, that God is _incomprehensible_;
that is to say, that there is nothing can arise in our fancy from
the naming of him, to resemble him either in _shape_, _colour_,
_stature_, or _nature_; there is no idea of him; he is like nothing
that we can think on. What then ought we to say of him? What
attributes are to be given him (not speaking otherwise than we
think, nor otherwise than is fit,) by those who mean to honour him?
None but such as Mr. Hobbes hath set down, namely, expressions of
reverence, such as are in use amongst men for signs of honour, and
consequently signify _goodness_, _greatness_, and _happiness_; and
either absolutely put, as _good_, _holy_, _mighty_, _blessed_,
_just_, _wise_, _merciful_, &c., or superlative, as _most good_,
_most great_, _most mighty_, _almighty_, _most holy_, &c., or
negative of whatsoever is not perfect, as _infinite_, _eternal_, and
the like: and not such as neither reason nor Scripture hath approved
for honourable. This is the doctrine that Mr. Hobbes hath written,
both in his _Leviathan_, and in his book _De Cive_, and when
occasion serves, maintains. What kind of attribute, I pray you, is,
_immaterial_, or _incorporeal substance_? Where do you find it in
the Scripture? Whence came it hither, but from Plato and Aristotle,
heathens, who mistook those thin inhabitants of the brain they see
in sleep, for so many _incorporeal_ men; and yet allowed them
motion, which is proper only to things _corporeal_? Do you think it
an honour to God to be one of these? And would you learn
Christianity from Plato and Aristotle? But seeing there is no such
word in the Scripture, how will you warrant it from natural reason?
Neither Plato nor Aristotle did ever write of, or mention, an
_incorporeal spirit_. For they could not conceive how a spirit,
which in their language was πνεῦμα, in ours _a wind_, could be
_incorporeal_. Do you understand the connexion of _substance_ and
_incorporeal_? If you do, explain it in English; for the words are
Latin. It is something, you will say, that being _without body,
stands under_——. Stands under what? Will you say, _under accidents_?
Almost all the Fathers of the Church will be against you; and then
you are an atheist. Is not Mr. Hobbes his way of attributing to God,
that only which the Scriptures attribute to him, or what is never
any where taken but for honour, much better than this bold
undertaking of yours, to consider and decipher God’s _nature_ to us?

For a third argument of atheism, you put, that he says: _besides the
creation of the world, there is no argument to prove a Deity_: and,
_that it cannot be evinced by any argument that the world had a
beginning_; and, _that whether it had or no, is to be decided not by
argument, but by the magistrate’s authority_. That it may be decided
by the Scriptures, he never denied; therefore in that also you
slander him. And as for arguments from natural reason, neither you,
nor any other, have hitherto brought any, except the creation, that
has not made it more doubtful to many men than it was before. That
which he hath written concerning such arguments, in his book _De
Corpore_: _opinions_, saith he (vol. I. p. 412), _concerning the
nature of infinite and eternal, as the chiefest of the fruits of
wisdom, God hath reserved to himself, and made judges of them those
men whose ministry he meant to use in the ordering of religion; and
therefore I cannot praise those men that brag of demonstration of
the beginning of the world from natural reason_: and again (vol. I.
p. 414), _wherefore I pass by those questions of infinite and
eternal, contenting myself with such doctrine concerning the
beginning and magnitude of the world, as I have learned from the
Scripture, confirmed by miracles, and from the use of my country,
and from the reverence I owe to the law_. This, Doctor, is not ill
said, and yet it is all you ground your slander on, which you make
to sneak vilely under a crooked paraphrase.

These opinions, I said, were to be judged by those to whom God has
committed the ordering of religion; that is, to the supreme
governors of the church, that is, in England, to the King: by his
authority, I say, it ought to be decided, not what men shall think,
but what they shall say in those questions. And methinks you should
not dare to deny it; for it is a manifest relapse into your former
crimes.

But why do you style the King by the name of _magistrate_? Do you
find _magistrate_ to signify any where the person that hath the
sovereign power, or not every where the sovereign’s officers. And I
think you knew that; but you and your fellows (your fellows I call
all those that are so besmeared all over with the filth of the same
crime, as not to be distinguished) meant to make your Assembly the
sovereign, and the King your _magistrate_. I pray God you do not
mean so still, if opportunity be presented.

There has hitherto appeared in Mr. Hobbes his doctrine, no sign of
atheism; and whatsoever can be inferred from the denying of
_incorporeal substances_, makes Tertullian, one of the ancientest of
the Fathers, and most of the doctors of the Greek Church, as much
atheists as he. For Tertullian, in his treatise _De Carne Christi_,
says plainly: _omne quod est, corpus est sui generis. Nihil est
incorporale, nisi quod non est_: that is to say, _whatsoever is
anything, is a body of its kind. Nothing is incorporeal, but that
which has no being._ There are many other places in him to the same
purpose: for that doctrine served his turn to confute the heresy of
them that held that Christ had no body, but was a _ghost_; also of
the soul he speaks, as of an invisible body. And there is an epitome
of the doctrine of the Eastern Church, wherein is this, that they
thought angels and souls were _corporeal_, and only called
_incorporeal_, because their bodies were not like ours. And I have
heard that a Patriarch of Constantinople, in a Council held there,
did argue for the lawfulness of painting angels, from this, that
they were _corporeal_. You see what fellows in atheism you join with
Mr. Hobbes.

How unfeigned your own religion is, may be argued strongly,
demonstratively, from your behaviour, that I have already recited.
Do you think, you that have committed so abominable sins, not
through infirmity, or sudden transport of passion, but
premeditately, wilfully, for twenty years together, that any
rational man can think you believe yourselves, when you preach of
heaven and hell, or that you do not believe one another to be cheats
and impostors, and laugh at silly people in your sleeves for
believing you; or that you applaud not your own wit for it; though
for my part I could never conceive that very much wit was requisite
for the making of a knave? And in the pulpit most of you have been a
scandal to Christianity, by preaching up sedition, and crying down
moral virtue. You should have preached against unjust _ambition_,
_covetousness_, _gluttony_, _malice_, _disobedience to government_,
_fraud_, and _hypocrisy_: but for the most part you preached your
own controversies, about who should be uppermost, or other fruitless
and unedifying doctrines. When did any of you preach against
_hypocrisy_? You dare not in the pulpit, I think, so much as name
it, lest you set the church a laughing: and you in particular, when
you said in a sermon, that σοψίης was not in Homer. What edification
could the people have from that, though it had been true, as it is
false? For it is in his _Iliad_, XV. 412. Another I heard make half
his sermon of this doctrine, that _God never sent a great
deliverance, but in a great danger_: which is indeed true, because
the greatness of the danger makes the greatness of the deliverance,
but for the same cause ridiculous; and the other half he took to
construe the Greek of his text: and yet such sermons are much
applauded. But why? First, because they make not the people ashamed
of any vice. Secondly, because they like the preacher, for using to
find fault with the government or governors. Thirdly, for their
vehemence, which they mistake for zeal. Fourthly, for their zeal to
their own ends, which they mistake for zeal to God’s worship. I have
heard besides divers sermons made by fanatics, young men, and whom,
by that and their habit, I imagined to be apprentices; and found
little difference between their sermons, and the sermons of such as
you, either in respect of wisdom, or eloquence, or vehemence, or
applause of common people.

Therefore, I wonder how you can pretend, as you do in your petition
for a dispensation from the ceremonies of the Church, to be either
better preachers than those that conform, or to have tenderer
consciences than other men. You that have covered such black designs
with the sacred words of Scripture, why can you not as well find in
your hearts to cover a black gown with a white surplice? Or what
idolatry do you find in making the sign of the cross, when the law
commands it? Though I think you may conform without sin, yet I think
you might have been also dispensed with without sin, if you had
dispensed in like manner with other ministers that subscribed to the
articles of the Church. And if tenderness of conscience be a good
plea, you must give Mr. Hobbes also leave to plead tenderness of
conscience to his new Divinity, as well as you. I should wonder
also, how any of you should dare to speak to a multitude met
together, without being limited by his Majesty what they shall say,
especially now that we have felt the smart of it, but that it is a
relic of the ecclesiastical policy of the Popes, that found it
necessary for the disjoining of the people from their too close
adherence to their Kings or other civil governors.

But it may be you will say, that the rest of the clergy, bishops,
and episcopal men, no friends of yours, and against whose office Mr.
Hobbes never writ anything, speak no better of his religion than you
do.

It is true, he never wrote against episcopacy; and it is his private
opinion, that such an episcopacy as is now in England, is the most
commodious that a Christian King can use for the governing of
Christ’s flock; the misgoverning whereof the King is to answer for
to Christ, as the bishops are to answer for their misgovernment to
the King, and to God also. Nor ever spake he ill of any of them, as
to their persons: therefore I should wonder the more at the
uncharitable censure of some of them, but that I see a relic still
remaining of the venom of popish ambition, lurking in that seditious
_distinction_ and _division_ between the power _spiritual_ and
_civil_; which they that are in love with a power to hurt all those
that stand in competition with them for learning, as the Roman
clergy had to hurt Galileo, do not willingly forsake. All bishops
are not in every point like one another. Some, it may be, are
content to hold their authority from the King’s letters patents; and
these have no cause to be angry with Mr. Hobbes. Others will needs
have somewhat more, they know not what, of divine right, to govern
by virtue of _imposition of hands_, and _consecration_, not
acknowledging their power from the King, but immediately from
Christ. And these perhaps are they that are displeased with him,
which he cannot help, nor has deserved; but will for all that
believe the King only, and without sharers, to be the head of all
the Churches within his own dominions; and that he may dispense with
ceremonies, or with anything else that is not against the
Scriptures, nor against natural equity; and that the consent of the
Lords and Commons cannot now give him that power, but declare, for
the people, their advice and consent to it. Nor can he be made
believe that the safety of a state depends upon the safety of the
Church, I mean of the clergy. For neither is a clergy essential to a
commonwealth; and those ministers that preached sedition, pretend to
be of the clergy, as well as the best. He believes rather that the
safety of the Church depends on the safety of the King, and the
entireness of the sovereign power; and that the King is no part of
the flock of any minister or bishop, no more than the shepherd is of
his sheep, but of Christ only; and all the clergy, as well as the
people, the King’s flock. Nor can that clamour of his adversaries
make Mr. Hobbes think himself a worse Christian than the best of
them. And how will you disprove it, either by his disobedience, to
the laws _civil_ or _ecclesiastical_, or by any ugly action? Or how
will you prove that the obedience, which springs from scorn of
injustice, is less acceptable to God, than that which proceeds from
fear of punishment, or hope of benefit. Gravity and heaviness of
countenance are not so good marks of assurance of God’s favour, as
cheerful, charitable, and upright behaviour towards men, which are
better signs of religion than the zealous maintaining of
controverted doctrines. And therefore I am verily persuaded, it was
not his Divinity that displeased you or them, but somewhat else,
which you are not willing to pretend. As for your party, that which
angered you, I believe, was this passage of his _Leviathan_ (vol.
iii. p. 160); _Whereas some men have pretended for their
disobedience to their sovereign, a new covenant made, not with men,
but with God; this also is unjust. For there is no covenant with
God, but by mediation of somebody that represented God’s person;
which none doth but God’s lieutenant, who hath the sovereignty under
God. But this pretence of covenant with God, is so evident a lie_,
(this is it that angered you), _even in the pretenders' own
consciences, that it is not only an act of an unjust, but also of a
vile and unmanly disposition_.

Besides, his making the King judge of doctrines to be preached or
published, hath offended you both; so has also his attributing to
the civil sovereign all power _sacerdotal_. But this perhaps may
seem hard, when the sovereignty is in a Queen. But it is because you
are not subtle enough to perceive, that though _man_ be _male_ and
_female_, _authority_ is not. To please neither party is easy; but
to please both, unless you could better agree amongst yourselves
than you do, is impossible. Your differences have troubled the
kingdom, as if you were the houses revived of York and Lancaster. A
man would wonder how a little Latin and Greek should work so
mightily, when the Scriptures are in English, as that the King and
Parliament can hardly keep you quiet, especially in time of danger
from abroad. If you will needs quarrel, decide it amongst
yourselves, and draw not the people into your parties.

You were angry also for his blaming the scholastical philosophers,
and denying such fine things as these: _that the species or
apparences of bodies come from the thing we look on, into the eye,
and so make us see; and into the understanding, to make us
understand; and into the memory, to make us remember: that a body
may be just the same it was, and yet bigger or lesser: that eternity
is a permanent now_; and the like: and for detecting, further than
you thought fit, the fraud of the Roman clergy. Your dislike of his
divinity, was the least cause of your calling him atheist. But no
more of this now.

The next head of your contumelies is to make him contemptible, and
to move Mr. Boyle to pity him. This is a way of railing too much
beaten to be thought witty. As for the thing itself, I doubt your
intelligence is not good, and that you algebricians, and
non-conformists, do but feign it, to comfort one another. For your
own part, you contemn him not, or else you did very foolishly to
entitle the beginning of your book, _Mr. Hobbes considered_; which
argues he is considerable enough to you. Besides, it is no argument
of contempt, to spend upon him so many angry lines as would have
furnished you with a dozen of sermons. If you had in good earnest
despised him, you would have let him alone, as he does Dr. Ward, Mr.
Baxter, Pike, and others, that have reviled him as you do. As for
his reputation beyond the seas, it fades not yet: and because
perhaps you have no means to know it, I will cite you a passage of
an Epistle, written by a learned Frenchman to an eminent person in
France, a passage not impertinent to the point now in question. It
is in a volume of Epistles, the fourth in order, and the words (page
167) concerning chemists, are these: _Truly, Sir, as much as I
admire them, when I see them lute an alembic handsomely, filter a
liquor, build an athanor, so much I dislike them when I hear them
discourse upon the subject of their operations; and yet they think
all they do, is nothing in respect of what they say. I wish they
would take less pains, and be at less charges; and whilst they wash
their hands after their work, they would leave to those that attend
to the polishing of their discourse, I mean, the Galileos, the
Descarteses, the Hobbeses, the Bacons, and the Gassendis, to reason
upon their work, and themselves to hear what the learned and
judicious shall tell them, such as are used to discern the
differences of things. Quam scit uterque libens censebo exerceat
artem._ And more to the same purpose.

What is here said of chymists, is applicable to all other mechanics.

Every man that hath spare money, can get furnaces, and buy coals.
Every man that hath spare money, can be at the charge of making
great moulds, and hiring workmen to grind their glasses; and so may
have the best and greatest telescopes. They can get engines made,
and apply them to the stars; recipients made, and try conclusions;
but they are never the more philosophers for all this. It is
laudable, I confess, to bestow money upon curious or useful
delights; but that is none of the praises of a philosopher. And yet,
because the multitude cannot judge, they will pass with the
unskilful, for skilful in all parts of natural philosophy. And I
hear now, that Hugenius and Eustachio Divini are to be tried by
their glasses, who is the more skilful in _optics_ of the two; but
for my part, before Mr. Hobbes his book _De Homine_ came forth, I
never saw any thing written on that subject intelligibly. Do not you
tell me now, according to your wonted ingenuity, that I never saw
Euclid’s, Vitellio’s, and many other men’s _Optics_; as if I could
not distinguish between _geometry_ and _optics_.

So also of all other arts; not every one that brings from beyond
seas a new gin, or other jaunty device, is therefore a philosopher.
For if you reckon that way, not only apothecaries and gardeners, but
many other sorts of workmen, will put in for, and get the prize.
Then, when I see the gentlemen of Gresham College apply themselves
to the doctrine of motion, (as Mr. Hobbes has done, and will be
ready to help them in it, if they please, and so long as they use
him civilly,) I will look to know some causes of natural events from
them, and their register, and not before: for nature does nothing
but by motion.

I hear that the reason given by Mr. Hobbes, why the drop of glass so
much wondered at, shivers into so many pieces, by breaking only one
small part of it, is approved for probable, and registered in their
college. But he has no reason to take it for a favour: because
hereafter the invention may be taken, by that means, not for his,
but theirs.

To the rest of your calumnies the answers will be short, and such as
you might easily have foreseen. And first, for his boasting of his
learning, it is well summed up by you in these words: _It was a
motion made by one, whom I will not name, that some idle person
should read over all his books, and collecting together his arrogant
and supercilious speeches, applauding himself, and despising all
other men, set them forth in one synopsis, with this title_, Hobbius
de se. _What a pretty piece of pageantry this would make, I shall
leave to your own thoughts._

Thus say you: now says Mr. Hobbes, or I for him, let your idle
person do it, and set down no more than he has written, as high
praises as they be, I will promise you he shall acknowledge them
under his hand, and be commended for it, and you scorned. A certain
Roman senator having propounded something in the assembly of the
people, which they misliking made a noise at, boldly bade them hold
their peace, and told them he knew better what was good for the
commonwealth than all they. And his words are transmitted to us as
an argument of his virtue; so much do truth and vanity alter the
complexion of self-praise. Besides, you can have very little skill
in morality, that cannot see the justice of commending a man’s self,
as well as of anything else, in his own defence: and it was want of
prudence in you, to constrain him to a thing that would so much
displease you. That part of his self-praise which most offends you,
is in the end of his _Leviathan_ (page 713), in these words:
_Therefore I think it may be profitably printed, and more profitably
taught in the Universities, in case they also think so, to whom the
judgment of the same belongeth_. Let any man consider the truth of
it. Where did those ministers learn their seditious doctrine, and to
preach it, but there? Where therefore should preachers learn to
teach loyalty, but there? And if your principles produced civil war,
must not the contrary principles, which are his, produce peace? And
consequently his book, as far as it handles civil doctrine, deserves
to be taught there. But when can this be done? When you shall have
no longer an army ready to maintain the evil doctrine wherewith you
have infected the people. By a ready army, I mean arms, and money,
and men enough, though not yet in pay, and put under officers, yet
gathered together in one place or city, to be put under officers,
armed, and paid on any sudden occasion; such as are the people of a
great and populous town. Every great city is as a standing army,
which if it be not under the sovereign’s command, the people are
miserable; if they be, they may be taught their duties in the
Universities safely and easily, and be happy. I never read of any
Christian king that was a tyrant, though the best of kings have been
called so.

Then for the _morosity_ and _peevishness_ you charge him with, all
that know him familiarly, know it is a false accusation. But you
mean, it may be, only towards those that argue against his opinion;
but neither is that true. When vain and ignorant young scholars,
unknown to him before, come to him on purpose to argue with him, and
to extort applause for their foolish opinions; and, missing of their
end, fall into indiscreet and uncivil expressions, and he then
appear not very well contented: it is not his _morosity_, but their
_vanity_ that should be blamed. But what humour, if not morosity and
peevishness, was that of yours, whom he never had injured, or seen,
or heard of, to use toward him such insolent, injurious, and
clownish words, as you did in your absurd _Elenchus_?

Was it not impatience of seeing any dissent from you in opinion? Mr.
Hobbes has been always far from provoking any man, though when he is
provoked, you find his pen as sharp as yours.

Again, when you make his age a reproach to him, and show no cause
that might impair the faculties of his mind, but only age, I admire
how you saw not that you reproached all old men in the world as much
as him, and warranted all young men, at a certain time, which they
themselves shall define, to call you _fool_. Your dislike of old
age, you have also otherwise sufficiently signified, in venturing so
fairly as you have done to escape it. But that is no great matter to
one that hath so many marks upon him of much greater reproaches. By
Mr. Hobbes his calculation, that derives prudence from experience,
and experience from age, you are a very young man; but by your own
reckoning, you are older already than Methuselah.

Lastly, who told you that he writ against Mr. Boyle, whom in his
writing he never mentioned, and that it was, because Mr. Boyle was
acquainted with you? I know the contrary. I have heard him wish it
had been some person of lower condition, that had been the author of
the doctrine which he opposed, and therefore opposed because it was
false, and because his own could not otherwise be defended. But thus
much I think is true, that he thought never the better of his
judgment, for mistaking you for learned. This is all I thought fit
to answer for him and his manners. The rest is of his geometry and
philosophy, concerning which, I say only this, that there is too
much in your book to be confuted; almost every line may be
disproved, or ought to be reprehended. In sum, it is all error and
railing, that is, stinking wind; such as a jade lets fly, when he is
too hard girt upon a full belly. I have done. I have considered you
now, but will not again, whatsoever preferment any of your friends
shall procure you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               THE ANSWER
                                   OF
                               MR. HOBBES
                                   TO
                         SIR WILLIAM DAVENANT’S
                       PREFACE BEFORE GONDIBERT.

                             THE ANSWER

                    TO THE PREFACE TO GONDIBERT.

    SIR,

If to commend your poem, I should only say, in general terms, that
in the choice of your argument, the disposition of the parts, the
maintenance of the characters of your persons, the dignity and
vigour of your expression, you have performed all the parts of
various experience, ready memory, clear judgment, swift and
well-governed fancy: though it were enough for the truth, it were
too little for the weight and credit of my testimony. For I lie open
to two exceptions, one of an incompetent, the other of a corrupted
witness. Incompetent, because I am not a poet; and corrupted with
the honour done me by your preface. The former obliges me to say
something, by the way, of the nature and differences of poesy.

As philosophers have divided the universe, their subject, into three
regions, _celestial_, _aerial_, and _terrestial_; so the poets,
whose work it is, by imitating human life, in delightful and
measured lines, to avert men from vice, and incline them to virtuous
and honourable actions, have lodged themselves in the three regions
of mankind, _court_, _city_, and _country_, correspondent, in some
proportion, to those three regions of the world. For there is in
princes, and men of conspicuous power, anciently called _heroes_, a
lustre and influence upon the rest of men, resembling that of the
heavens; and an insincereness, inconstancy, and troublesome humour
in those that dwell in populous cities, like the mobility,
blustering, and impurity of the air; and a plainness, and, though
dull, yet a nutritive faculty in rural people, that endures a
comparison with the earth they labour.

From hence have proceeded three sorts of poesy, _heroic_,
_scommatic_, and _pastoral_. Every one of these is distinguished
again in the manner of _representation_; which sometimes is
_narrative_, wherein the poet himself relateth; and sometimes
_dramatic_, as when the persons are every one adorned and brought
upon the theatre, to speak and act their own parts. There is
therefore neither more nor less than six sorts of poesy. For the
heroic poem narrative, such as is yours, is called an _epic_ poem;
the heroic poem dramatic, is _tragedy_. The scommatic narrative is
_satire_; dramatic is _comedy_. The pastoral narrative, is called
simply _pastoral_, anciently _bucolic_; the same dramatic, _pastoral
comedy_. The figure therefore of an epic poem, and of a tragedy,
ought to be the same: for they differ no more but in that they are
pronounced by one, or many persons; which I insert to justify the
figure of yours, consisting of five books divided into songs, or
cantos; as five acts divided into scenes, has ever been the approved
figure of a tragedy.

They that take for poesy whatsoever is writ in verse, will think
this division imperfect, and call in sonnets, epigrams, eclogues,
and the like pieces, which are but essays, and parts of an entire
poem; and reckon Empedocles and Lucretius, natural philosophers, for
poets; and the moral precepts of Phocylides Theognis, and the
quatrains of Pybrach, and the history of Lucan, and others of that
kind, amongst poems: bestowing on such writers, for honour, the name
of poets, rather than of historians or philosophers. But the subject
of a poem is the manners of men, not natural causes; manners
presented, not dictated; and manners feigned, as the name of poesy
imports, not found in men. They that give entrance to fictions writ
in prose, err not so much; but they err; for prose requireth
delightfulness, not only of fiction, but of style; in which if prose
contend with verse, it is with disadvantage and, as it were, on foot
against the strength and wings of Pegasus.

For verse amongst the Greeks was appropriated anciently to the
service of their Gods, and was the holy style; the style of the
oracles; the style of the laws; and the style of the men that
publicly recommended to their Gods the vows and thanks of the
people, which was done in their holy songs called hymns; and the
composers of them were called prophets and priests, before the name
of poet was known. When afterwards the majesty of that style was
observed, the poets chose it as best becoming their high invention.
And for the antiquity of verse, it is greater than the antiquity of
letters. For it is certain, Cadmus was the first that from Phœnicia,
a country that neighboureth Judea, brought the use of letters into
Greece. But the service of the Gods, and the laws, which by measured
sounds were easily committed to the memory, had been long time in
use before the arrival of Cadmus there.

There is, besides the grace of style, another cause why the ancient
poets chose to write in measured language; which is this. Their
poems were made at first with intention to have them sung, as well
epic as dramatic (which custom hath been long time laid aside, but
began to be revived in part, of late years, in Italy,) and could not
be made commensurable to the voice or instruments, in prose; the
ways and motions whereof are so uncertain and undistinguished, like
the way and motion of a ship in the sea, as not only to discompose
the best composers, but also to disappoint sometimes the most
attentive reader, and put him to hunt counter for the sense. It was
therefore necessary for poets in those times to write in verse.

The verse which the Greeks and Latins, considering the nature of
their own languages, found by experience most grave, and for an epic
poem most decent, was their _hexameter_; a verse limited not only in
the length of the line, but also in the quantity of the syllables.
Instead of which we use the line of ten syllables, recompensing the
neglect of their quantity with the diligence of rhyme. And this
measure is so proper to an heroic poem, as without some loss of
gravity or dignity, it was never changed. A longer is not far from
ill prose; and a shorter, is a kind of whisking, you know, like the
unlacing, rather than the singing of a muse. In an epigram or a
sonnet, a man may vary his measures, and seek glory from a needless
difficulty; as he that contrived verses into the forms of an organ,
a hatchet, an egg, an altar, and a pair of wings; but in so great
and noble a work as is an epic poem, for a man to obstruct his own
way with unprofitable difficulties, is great imprudence. So likewise
to choose a needless and difficult correspondence of rhyme, is but a
difficult toy, and forces a man sometimes, for the stopping of a
chink, to say somewhat he did never think. I cannot therefore but
very much approve your _stanza_, wherein the syllables in every
verse are ten, and the rhyme alternate.

For the choice of your subject you have sufficiently justified
yourself in your preface. But because I have observed in Virgil,
that the honour done to Æneas and his companions, has so bright a
reflection upon Augustus Cæsar, and other great Romans of that time,
as a man may suspect him not constantly possessed with the noble
spirit of those his heroes; and I believe you are not acquainted
with any great man of the race of Gondibert, I add to your
justification the purity of your purpose, in having no other motive
of your labour, but to adorn virtue, and procure her lovers; than
which there cannot be a worthier design, and more becoming noble
poesy.

In that you make so small account of the example of almost all the
approved poets, ancient and modern, who thought fit in the
beginning, and sometimes also in the progress of their poems, to
invoke a Muse, or some other deity, that should dictate to them, or
assist them in their writings; they that take not the laws of art,
from any reason of their own, but from the fashion of precedent
times, will perhaps accuse your singularity. For my part, I neither
subscribe to their accusation, nor yet condemn that heathen custom,
otherwise than as accessory to their false religion. For their poets
were their divines; had the name of prophets; exercised amongst the
people a kind of spiritual authority; would be thought to speak by a
divine spirit; have their works which they writ in verse (the divine
style) pass for the word of God, and not of man, and to be hearkened
to with reverence. Do not the divines, excepting the style, do the
same, and by us that are of the same religion cannot justly be
reprehended for it? Besides, in the use of the spiritual calling of
divines, there is danger sometimes to be feared, from want of skill,
such as is reported of unskilful conjurers, that mistaking the rites
and ceremonious points of their art, call up such spirits, as they
cannot at their pleasure allay again; by whom storms are raised,
that overthrow buildings, and are the cause of miserable wrecks at
sea. Unskilful divines do oftentimes the like; for when they call
unseasonably for _zeal_, there appears a spirit of _cruelty_; and by
the like error, instead of _truth_, they raise _discord_; instead of
_wisdom_, _fraud_; instead of _reformation_, _tumult_; and
_controversy_, instead of _religion_. Whereas in the heathen poets,
at least in those whose works have lasted to the time we are in,
there are none of those indiscretions to be found, that tended to
the subversion, or disturbance of the commonwealths wherein they
lived. But why a Christian should think it an ornament to his poem,
either to profane the true God, or invoke a false one, I can imagine
no cause, but a reasonless imitation of custom; of a foolish custom,
by which a man enabled to speak wisely from the principles of
nature, and his own meditation, loves rather to be thought to speak
by inspiration, like a bagpipe.

Time and education beget experience; experience begets memory;
memory begets judgment and fancy; judgment begets the strength and
structure, and fancy begets the ornaments of a poem. The ancients
therefore fabled not absurdly, in making Memory the mother of the
Muses. For memory is the world, though not really, yet so as in a
looking-glass, in which the judgment, the severer sister, busieth
herself in a grave and rigid examination of all the parts of nature,
and in registering by letters their order, causes, uses,
differences, and resemblances; whereby the fancy, when any work of
art is to be performed, finds her materials at hand and prepared for
use, and needs no more than a swift motion over them, that what she
wants, and is there to be had, may not lie too long unespied. So
that when she seemeth to fly from one Indies to the other, and from
heaven to earth, and to penetrate into the hardest matter and
obscurest places, into the future, and into herself, and all this in
a point of time, the voyage is not very great, herself being all she
seeks. And her wonderful celerity, consisteth not so much in motion,
as in copious imagery discreetly ordered, and perfectly registered
in the memory; which most men under the name of philosophy have a
glimpse of, and is pretended to by many, that grossly mistaking her,
embrace contention in her place. But so far forth as the fancy of
man has traced the ways of true philosophy, so far it hath produced
very marvellous effects to the benefit of mankind. All that is
beautiful or defensible in building; or marvellous in engines and
instruments of motion; whatsoever commodity men receive from the
observations of the heavens, from the description of the earth, from
the account of time, from walking on the seas; and whatsoever
distinguisheth the civility of Europe, from the barbarity of the
American savages; is the workmanship of fancy, but guided by the
precepts of true philosophy. But where these precepts fail, as they
have hitherto failed in the doctrine of moral virtue, there the
architect Fancy must take the philosopher’s part upon herself. He,
therefore, who undertakes an heroic poem, which is to exhibit a
venerable and amiable image of heroic virtue, must not only be the
poet, to place and connect, but also the philosopher, to furnish and
square his matter; that is, to make both body and soul, colour and
shadow of his poem out of his own store; which, how well you have
performed I am now considering.

Observing how few the persons be you introduce in the beginning, and
how in the course of the actions of these, the number increasing,
after several confluences, they run all at last into the two
principal streams of your poem, _Gondibert and Oswald_, methinks the
fable is not much unlike the theatre. For so, from several and far
distant sources, do the lesser brooks of Lombardy, flowing into one
another, fall all at last into the two main rivers, the Po and the
Adige. It hath the same resemblance also with a man’s veins, which
proceeding from different parts, after the like concourse, insert
themselves at last into the two principal veins of the body. But
when I considered that also the actions of men, which singly are
inconsiderable, after many conjunctures, grow at last either into
one great protecting power, or into two destroying factions, I could
not but approve the structure of your poem, which ought to be no
other than such as an imitation of human life requireth.

In the streams themselves I find nothing but settled valour, clean
honour, calm counsel, learned diversion, and pure love; save only a
torrent or two of ambition, which, though a fault, has somewhat
heroic in it, and therefore must have place in an heroic poem. To
shew the reader in what place he shall find every excellent picture
of virtue you have drawn, is too long. And to show him one, is to
prejudice the rest; yet I cannot forbear to point him to the
description of love in the person of Bertha, in the seventh canto of
the second book. There has nothing been said of that subject,
neither by the ancient nor modern poets, comparable to it. Poets are
painters; I would fain see another painter draw so true, perfect,
and natural a love to the life, and make use of nothing but pure
lines, without the help of any the least uncomely shadow, as you
have done. But let it be read as a piece by itself: for in the
almost equal height of the whole, the eminence of parts is lost.

There are some that are not pleased with fiction, unless it be bold;
not only to exceed the _work_, but also the _possibility_ of nature;
they would have impenetrable armours, enchanted castles,
invulnerable bodies, iron men, flying horses, and a thousand other
such things, which are easily feigned by them that dare. Against
such I defend you, without assenting to those that condemn either
Homer or Virgil; by dissenting only from those that think the beauty
of a poem consisteth in the exorbitancy of the fiction. For as truth
is the bound of historical, so the resemblance of truth is the
utmost limit of poetical liberty. In old time amongst the heathen,
such strange fictions and metamorphoses were not so remote from the
articles of their faith, as they are now from ours, and therefore
were not so unpleasant. Beyond the actual works of nature a poet may
now go; but beyond the conceived possibility of nature, never. I can
allow a geographer to make in the sea, a fish or a ship, which by
the scale of his map would be two or three hundred miles long, and
think it done for ornament, because it is done without the precincts
of his undertaking: but when he paints an elephant so, I presently
apprehend it as ignorance, and a plain confession of _terra
incognita_.

As the description of great men and great actions is the constant
design of a poet; so the descriptions of worthy circumstances are
necessary accessions to a poem, and being well performed, are the
jewels and most precious ornaments of poesy. Such in Virgil are the
funeral games of Anchises, the duel of Æneas and Turnus, &c. And
such in yours, are _the Hunting_, _the Battle_, _the City Mourning_,
_the Funeral_, _the House of Astragon_, _the Library and the
Temple_; equal to his, or those of Homer whom he imitated.

There remains now no more to be considered but the expression, in
which consisteth the countenance and colour of a beautiful Muse; and
is given her by the poet out of his own provision, or is borrowed
from others. That which he hath of his own, is nothing but
experience and knowledge of nature, and specially human nature; and
is the true and natural colour. But that which is taken out of
books, the ordinary boxes of counterfeit complexion, shows well or
ill, as it hath more or less resemblance with the natural; and are
not to be used without examination unadvisedly. For in him that
professes the imitation of nature, as all poets do, what greater
fault can there be, than to betray an ignorance of nature in his
poem; especially, having a liberty allowed him, if he meet with any
thing he cannot master, to leave it out?

That which giveth a poem the true and natural colour, consisteth in
two things; which are, _to know well_, that is, to have images of
nature in the memory distinct and clear; and _to know much_. A sign
of the first is perspicuity, propriety, and decency; which delight
all sorts of men, either by instructing the ignorant, or soothing
the learned in their knowledge. A sign of the latter is novelty of
expression, and pleaseth by excitation of the mind; for novelty
causeth admiration, and admiration curiosity, which is a delightful
appetite of knowledge.

There be so many words in use at this day in the English tongue,
that, though of magnific sound, yet like the windy blisters of
troubled waters, have no sense at all, and so many others that lose
their meaning by being ill coupled; that it is a hard matter to
avoid them. For having been obtruded upon youth in the schools, by
such as make it, I think, their business there, as it is expressed
by the best poet

         “With terms to charm the weak and pose the wise,”
                     GONDIBERT, Book ii. Canto 5, verse 44.

they grow up with them, and gaining reputation with the ignorant,
are not easily shaken off.

To this palpable darkness, I may also add the ambitious obscurity of
expressing more than is perfectly conceived; or perfect conception
in fewer words than it requires. Which expressions, though they have
had the honour to be called strong lines, are indeed no better than
riddles, and not only to the reader, but also after a little time to
the writer himself, dark and troublesome.

To the propriety of expression I refer that clearness of memory, by
which a poet when he hath once introduced any person whatsoever,
speaking in his poem, maintaineth in him to the end the same
character he gave him in the beginning. The variation whereof, is a
change of pace, that argues the poet tired.

Of the indecencies of an heroic poem, the most remarkable are those
that show disproportion either between the persons and their
actions, or between the manners of the poet and the poem. Of the
first kind, is the uncomeliness of representing in great persons the
inhuman vice of cruelty, or the sordid vices of lust and
drunkenness. To such parts, as those the ancient approved poets
thought it fit to suborn, not the persons of men, but of monsters
and beastly giants, such as Polyphemus, Cacus, and the Centaurs. For
it is supposed a Muse, when she is invoked to sing a song of that
nature, should maidenly advise the poet to set such persons to sing
their own vices upon the stage; for it is not so unseemly in a
_tragedy_. Of the same kind it is to represent scurrility, or any
action or language that moveth much laughter. The delight of an
_epic_ poem consisteth not in mirth, but admiration. Mirth and
laughter are proper to _comedy_ and _satire_. Great persons, that
have their minds employed on great designs, have not leisure enough
to laugh, and are pleased with the contemplation of their own power
and virtues, so as they need not the infirmities and vices of other
men to recommend themselves to their own favour by comparison, as
all men do when they laugh. Of the second kind, where the
disproportion is between the poet and the persons of his poem, one
is in the dialect of the inferior sort of people, which is always
different from the language of the court. Another is, to derive the
illustration of any thing from such metaphors or comparisons as
cannot come into men’s thoughts, but by mean conversation, and
experience of humble or evil arts, which the person of an epic poem
cannot be thought acquainted with.

From _knowing much_, proceedeth the admirable variety and novelty of
metaphors and similitudes, which are not possible to be lighted on
in the compass of a narrow knowledge. And the want whereof
compelleth a writer to expressions that are either defaced by time,
or sullied with vulgar or long use. For the phrases of poesy, as the
airs of music, with often hearing become insipid; the reader having
no more sense of their force, than our flesh is sensible of the
bones that sustain it. As the sense we have of bodies, consisteth in
change of variety of impression, so also does the sense of language
in the variety and changeable use of words. I mean not in the
affectation of words newly brought home from travel, but in new, and
withal significant, translation to our purposes, of those that be
already received; and in far-fetched, but withal, apt, instructive,
and comely similitudes.

Having thus, I hope, avoided the first exception, against the
incompetency of my judgment, I am but little moved with the second,
which is of being bribed by the honour you have done me, by
attributing in your preface somewhat to my judgment. For I have used
your judgment no less in many things of mine, which coming to light
will thereby appear the better. And so you have your bribe again.

Having thus made way for the admission of my testimony, I give it
briefly thus. I never yet saw poem, that had so much shape of art,
health of morality, and vigour and beauty of expression, as this of
yours. And but for the clamour of the multitude, that hide their
envy of the present under a reverence of antiquity, I should say
further, that it would last as long as either the _Æneid_, or
_Iliad_, but for one disadvantage; and the disadvantage is this; the
languages of the Greeks and Romans, by their colonies and conquests,
have put off flesh and blood, and are become immutable, which none
of the modern tongues are like to be. I honour antiquity; but that
which is commonly called _old time_, is _young time_. The glory of
antiquity is due, not to the dead, but to the aged.

And now, whilst I think of it, give me leave with a short discord to
sweeten the harmony of the approaching close. I have nothing to
object against your poem; but dissent only from something in your
preface, sounding to the prejudice of age. It is commonly said, that
old age is a return to childhood. Which methinks you insist on so
long, as if you desired it should be believed. That is the note I
mean to shake a little. That saying, meant only of the weakness of
body, was wrested to the weakness of mind, by froward children,
weary of the controlment of their parents, masters, and other
admonitors. Secondly, the dotage and childishness they ascribe to
age, is never the effect of time, but sometimes of the excesses of
youth, and not a returning to, but a continual stay, with childhood.
For they that wanting the curiosity of furnishing their memories
with the rarities of nature in their youth, pass their time in
making provision only for their ease and sensual delight, are
children still at what years soever; as they that coming into a
populous city, never going out of their inn, are strangers still,
how long soever they have been there. Thirdly, there is no reason
for any man to think himself wiser to-day than yesterday, which does
not equally convince he shall be wiser to-morrow than to-day.
Fourthly, you will be forced to change your opinion hereafter when
you are old; and in the mean time you discredit all I have said
before in your commendation, because I am old already. But no more
of this.

I believe, Sir, you have seen a curious kind of perspective, where
he that looks through a short hollow pipe upon a picture containing
divers figures, sees none of those that are there painted, but some
one person made up of their parts, conveyed to the eye by the
artificial cutting of a glass. I find in my imagination an effect
not unlike it, from your poem. The virtues you distribute there
amongst so many noble persons, represent, in the reading, the image
but of one man’s virtue to my fancy, which is your own; and that so
deeply imprinted, as to stay for ever there, and govern all the rest
of my thoughts and affections in the way of honouring and serving
you to the utmost of my power, that am,

                                       Sir,
                          Your most humble and obedient servant,
                                                      THOMAS HOBBES.

_Paris, Jan. 10, 1650._


                                -------


                             LETTER TO THE
                    RIGHT HONOURABLE EDW. HOWARD.[B]

                TO THE RIGHT HON. MR. EDWARD HOWARD.

    SIR,

My judgment in poetry hath, you know, been once already censured by
very good wits, for commending _Gondibert_; but yet they have not, I
think, disabled my testimony. For what authority is there in wit? A
jester may have it; a man in drink may have it; be fluent over
night, and wise and dry in the morning. What is it? Or who can tell
whether it be better to have it or be without it, especially if it
be a pointed wit? I will take my liberty to praise what I like, as
well as they do to reprehend what they do not like. Your poem, Sir,
contains a well and judiciously contrived story, full of admirable
and heroic actions, set forth in noble and perspicuous language,
such as becomes the dignity of the persons you introduce: which two
things of themselves are the heighth of poetry. I know that variety
of story, true or feigned, is the thing wherewith the reader is
entertained most delightfully. And this also to the smallness of the
volume is not wanting. Yours is but one small piece; whereas the
poets that are with us so much admired, have taken larger subjects.
But let an English reader, in Homer or Virgil in English, by
whomsoever translated, read one piece by itself, no greater than
yours; I may make a question whether he will be less pleased with
yours than his. I know you do not equal your poem to either of
theirs: the bulk of the work does not distinguish the art of the
workman. [The Battle of Mice and Frogs may be owned without
disparagement by Homer himself. Yet if Homer had written nothing
else, he never had had the reputation of so admirable a poet as he
was.][C] Ajax was a man of very great stature, and Teucer a very
little person: yet he was brother to Ajax, both in blood and
chivalry. I commend your poem for judgment, not for bulk; and am
assured it will be welcome to the world with its own confidence;
though if it come forth armed with verses and epistles, I cannot
tell what to think of it. For the great wits will think themselves
threatened, and rebel. Unusual fortifications upon the borders,
carry with them a suspicion of hostility. And poets will think such
letters of commendation a kind of confederacy and league, tending to
usurp upon their liberty. [I have told you my judgment, and you may
make use of it as you please. But I remember a line or two in your
poem, that touched upon divinity, wherein we differed in opinion.
But since you say the book is licensed, I shall think no more upon
it, but only reserve my liberty of dissenting, which I know you will
allow me.][D] I rest,

                                           Sir,
                              Your most humble and obedient servant,
                                                      THOMAS HOBBES.

                                  _Chatsworth,
                              October the 24th, 1668._

Footnote B:

  This letter is here printed from the autograph of Mr. Hobbes, now
  in the possession of Rowland Eyles Egerton Warburton, Esq. of
  Arley Hall, Cheshire. The same letter, with the variations
  hereafter noticed, was prefixed to Mr. Howard’s poem, “_The
  British Princes_,” published in 1669: it is there addressed “_To
  the Honourable Edward Howard, Esq. on his intended impression of
  his poem of the 'British Princes,'_” and is subscribed,

                    “_I need say no more, but rest,
         Your Honour’s most humble and obedient servant_,
                                         THOMAS HOBBS.
  _Chatsworth, Nov. the 6th, 1668._”

Footnote C:

  The passage between brackets is omitted in the letter prefixed to
  the _British Princes_, and the following is substituted for it:
  “_Besides 'tis a virtue in a poet to advance the honour of his
  remotest ancestors, especially when it has not been done before.
  What, though you out-go the limits of certain history? Do
  painters, when they paint the face of the earth, leave a blank
  beyond what they know? Do not they fill up the space with strange
  rocks, monsters, and other gallantry, to fix their work in the
  memory of men by the delight of fancy? So will your readers from
  this poem think honourably of their original, which is a kind of
  piety._”

Footnote D:

  This passage is omitted in the “_British Princes_.”

                          END OF VOL. IV.




                  ------------------------------------

           G. RICHARDS, PRINTER, 100, ST. MARTIN'S LANE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                   BOOKS PUBLISHED BY JOHN BOHN.

                                -------

    _To be completed in 12 Vols. 8vo. each 12s. cloth lettered_,

                         THE COMPLETE WORKS

                                 OF

                           THOMAS HOBBES
                           OF MALMESBURY,

                   NOW FIRST COLLECTED AND EDITED

                                 BY
                 SIR WILLIAM MOLESWORTH, BART. M.P.


                                -------


Although the close reasoning of HOBBES, expressed in beautiful
language, has created a host of admirers, yet, owing to the
excessive rarity of his detached writings, many of which have never
been reprinted, no complete set of his works is to be found in any
one of our public or private libraries. To remedy this evil, and to
present an edition worthy of the Author, the Editor has collected
together the various pieces, and at his own cost has determined to
reprint them uniformly, in the best style of modern typography. Five
volumes (I. II. of the Latin, and I. III. and IV. of the English
works) are already published, and the remainder will follow as
speedily as a due regard to correctness will allow.

As the impression is limited, and the price of each volume (between
500 and 600 pages, with Engravings) is unusually low, the Publisher
has every reason to expect that within a short period the whole of
the copies will be subscribed for, and therefore would earnestly
recommend an early application, to prevent disappointment.

An excellent analysis of this author’s writings will be found in Mr.
Hallam’s able Introduction to the Literature of Europe, and the
following testimonies in favour of his style will convey some idea
of the estimation in which his writings are held.

“Hobbes’ language is so lucid and concise that it would almost be as
improper to put an algebraical process in different terms as some of
his metaphysical paragraphs.”—HALLAM.

“A permanent foundation of his fame consists in his admirable style,
which seems to be the very perfection of didactic language.“—SIR
JAMES MACKINTOSH.

“Here let us do justice to that great man’s memory, at a time his
writings seem to be entirely neglected, who, with all his errors, we
must allow to be one of the first men of his age, for a bright wit,
a deep penetration, and a cultivated understanding.”—BP. WARBURTON.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                -------

             In crown 8vo. price 8_s._ in extra boards,

                           =An Apology=

                                FOR

                       =Cathedral Service.=

          “_Apology for the Bible? I didn’t know that the
            Bible wanted any apology._”—KING GEORGE III.

“This is a very delightful work, and contains much more than its
title implies. The style is quaint and original, and reminds us of
that of some of our older writers. It is throughout enriched with a
number of curious and interesting quotations and illustrations,
which display considerable information and research. It is full of
the 'spirit of antiquity,' if we may use such an expression, and is
deeply imbued with a love for those admirable and venerable
institutions, which we owe to the wisdom of past ages. The defence
of the practice of chanting, of the whole Cathedral Service, and,
indeed, of Cathedral institutions altogether, is excellent, and will
repay an attentive perusal.”—CHURCHMAN.

“This clever work is indeed still of the Spirit of Antiquity, and
evinces great originality and freshness of thought, brilliancy of
imagination, profound argument, strong feeling, and a thorough and
hearted love of the cause so eloquently advocated.”—SALISBURY
HERALD.

                                -------

          In foolscap 8vo. price 8_s._ in cloth, lettered,

                     THE DEATH OF DEMOSTHENES.
                    =And other Original Poems:=
           WITH THE PROMETHEUS AND AGAMEMNON OF ÆSCHYLUS,
                     TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK,
                     BY GEORGE CROKER FOX, ESQ.

“We hail the publication of this work as a valuable addition to our
literature. With an elegant and graceful dedication to our young and
interesting Queen, the volume consists of original Poems,
distinguished for beauty of thought, expressed in language classic
and polished; and of translations rarely equalled for fidelity and
vigour. The Death of Demosthenes is indeed a noble subject, nobly
executed.”... “We have now done our most arduous but pleasing task,
to review the finest poems which have appeared for many years. In
this utilitarian age of steam and vapour, when, whilst we are going
on with our rail-roads, we are going back in our learning, it is
rare to find a mind which can think with and emulate the
ancients—give a new charm to classic literature—call forth the
mighty spirits of Greece—bring them, with all their eloquence and
genius, before us—create with them—copy after them. Mr. Fox,
therefore, deserves our commendation, and merits our gratitude for
his classical volume of poems; for nothing perfect in eloquence,
nothing perfect in poetry, can be produced, unless we love, study,
and imitate the great masters of thought and taste—the ancients—

              “—— —————————color che sanno.”—_Dante._

The classical is another name for the beautiful, and Mr. Fox’s
volume must charm all, except the ignorant without learning, and the
learned without taste.”—DUBLIN REVIEW.

                                -------

        In one volume, 8vo. price 16_s._ in cloth, lettered,

               A CLASSICAL & ARCHÆOLOGICAL DICTIONARY
   OF THE MANNERS, CUSTOMS, LAWS, INSTITUTIONS, ARTS, &C. OF THE
      CELEBRATED NATIONS OF ANTIQUITY AND OF THE MIDDLE AGES.
                        TO WHICH IS PREFIXED
      A SYNOPTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL VIEW OF ANCIENT HISTORY.
                      BY P. A. NUTTALL, LL.D.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

        In 15 vols. 8vo. price 7_l._ 17_s._ 6_d._ in boards,

                    TAYLOR'S (BP. JEREMY) WORKS,

              With Life, by Bp. HEBER. Third Edition.

                                -------

                        ARRIAN ON COURSING,

Translated from the Greek, with Classical and Practical Annotations,
  and a brief Sketch of the Life of the Author. To which is added an
  Appendix, containing some Account of the Canes Venatici of
  Classical Antiquity; royal 8vo. _24 embellishments from the
  Antique, on India paper_, extra boards, 1_l._ 11_s._ 6_d._

                                -------

             BRYDGES' (THE RT. HON. SIR HARFORD JONES)
                          WORKS ON PERSIA.

The Dynasty of the Kajars, translated from the original Persian
  Manuscript presented by His Majesty Faty Aly Shah to Sir Harford
  Jones Brydges, Bart. K.C. LL.D. late Envoy Extraordinary and
  Minister Plenipotentiary from his Britannic Majesty to the Court
  of Teheran. To which is prefixed, a succinct Account of the
  History of Persia previous to that Period, 8vo. frontispiece and 3
  maps, boards, 1_l._ 4_s._

An Account of the Transactions of His Majesty’s Mission to the Court
  of Persia in the Years 1807-11, by Sir Harford Jones Brydges,
  Bart. To which is added a brief History of the Wahauby, 2 vols.
  8vo. plates, bds. 1_l._ 1_s._

                                -------

                  DANSEY (REV. W.) ON RURAL DEANS.

Horæ Decanicæ Rurales, being an Attempt to illustrate, by a Series
  of Notes and Extracts, the Name and Title, the Origin,
  Appointment, and Functions of Rural Deans, &c. 2 vols. 4to.
  half-bound morocco, top edges gilt, 1_l._ 11_s._ 6_d._

Archdeacon Goddard, in his recent charge, strongly recommends this
excellent work to the attentive perusal of every clergyman.

                                -------

                    HIGGINS' (G.) CELTIC DRUIDS;

Or an Attempt to show that the Druids were the Priests of Oriental
  Colonies, who emigrated from India, and were the Introducers of
  the first or Cadmean System of Letters, and the builders of
  STONEHENGE, of Carnac, and of other Cyclopean Works in Asia and
  Europe, 4to. map and numerous plates, bds. 3_l._

                    _Also, by the same Author._

                            ANACALYPSIS,

An Attempt to draw aside the Veil of the Saitic Isis; or an Inquiry
  into the Origin of Languages, Nations and Religions, 2 vols. 4to.
  plates, bds. 5_l._

                                -------

               WOODVILLE'S (DR. WM.) MEDICAL BOTANY;

THIRD EDITION, materially enlarged and improved by Professor Sir
  WILLIAM JACKSON HOOKER, LL.D. F.R.S. L.S. &c. and G. SPRATT, Esq.
  5 vols. 4to. 310 plates, engraved by Sowerby and Spratt, boards,
  5_l._ 15_s._ 6_d._ or with the plates finely coloured, 8_l._

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   _In the press, and shortly will be published, in 3 vols. 8vo._

                            DR. FIELD'S
                        BOOK OF THE CHURCH.

                   =A New Edition, with Notes,=

                                 BY

                   THE REV. JOHN S. BREWER. M.A.
                    OF QUEEN'S COLLEGE, OXFORD.


                                -------


As Dr. Field’s Book of the Church has become excessively rare, and,
though much in request, is not attainable at any price, the
Publisher, at the suggestion of several eminent clergymen, has
undertaken a new edition of this very valuable work. In order to
render it worthy of attention, and far superior to all preceding
ones, the Rev. J. S. Brewer (a Gentleman whose well-known diligence
and accuracy guarantee its being executed in the best manner) has
kindly offered his services to collate the various editions, to
verify all the References, and to supply additional Notes where
necessary. He has likewise determined, on account of the extreme
rarity of many of the Authors cited by Dr. Field, to give his
quotations at full length at the bottom of each page; and at the end
of every chapter a brief list of writers, especially of English
Divines, who have treated on the same subject: thus rendering the
work a TEXT BOOK OF THEOLOGY.

As the rarity of this masterpiece of one of our most eminent Divines
has prevented its being so universally known as it deserves to be,
the Publisher may be pardoned for citing a few among the numerous
commendations in its favour.

Coleridge, the Poet, in a letter to his son, the Rev. Derwent
Coleridge, emphatically writes:—“THIS ONE VOLUME, THOROUGHLY
UNDERSTOOD AND APPROPRIATED, WILL PLACE YOU IN THE HIGHEST RANK OF
DOCTRINAL CHURCH-OF-ENGLAND DIVINES, AND OF NO MEAN RANK AS A TRUE
DOCTRINAL CHURCH HISTORIAN.”

King James I. delighted to discourse with Field on points of
Divinity, and, when he first preached before him, said: “Is his name
Field? This is the FIELD for God to dwell in.” On hearing of his
death, the King expressed regret, and added, “I should have done
more for that man!”

Fuller, in the same punning age, calls him, “That learned Divine,
whose memory smelleth like a FIELD which the Lord hath blessed.”

Anthony a Wood tells us he was esteemed “the best disputant in the
schools.”

“Field was well skilled in School Divinity, and a frequent preacher
while he lived in Oxfordshire, and is said to have been very
instrumental in preventing the increase of nonconformity in the
University.”—GOUGH.

“When he first set about writing his book 'OF THE CHURCH,' his old
acquaintance, Dr. Kettle, dissuaded him, telling him that when once
he was engaged in controversy he would never live quietly, but be
continually troubled with answers and replies. To this Field
answered, 'I will so write that they shall have no great mind to
answer me;' which proved to be nearly the case, as his main
arguments were never refuted.”—CHALMERS.

Heylin, in his “Life of Laud,” calls him, “the reverend right
learned Dr. Field, whose excellent works will keep his name alive to
succeeding ages.”

                         ---------------------

                   SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES RECEIVED BY
          JOHN BOHN, 17, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         Transcriber’s Note

In the table of contents, the page number for the final section
(“Letter to the Right Honourable Edward Howard”) was incorrectly
given as p. 459. The section begins at p. 458 and the correction was
made.

At 42.17, the word ‘forwardness’ appears. Several lines earlier,
‘frowardness’ is used. The discrepancy is probably a printer’s
error. ‘Froward’ is also used elsewhere: ‘_froward_ children, weary
of the controlment of their parents’ (p. 457). Since Hobbes is
discussing a specific behavior, the former has been retained as less
ambiguous.

The chapter summary for Part II, Chapter II of DE CORPORE POLITICO,
on p. 138, misnumbered section 2 as ‘1’.

On p. 117, a reference to section 16 of the XIIth chapter of _Human
Nature_ is incorrect. The 6th section of that chapter is the
obviously correct reference.

On p. 201, a reference to section 9 of the VIIth chapter of the same
text is also incorrect. The 8th section seems to be the intended
reference.

Other errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been
corrected, and are noted here. The references are to the page and
line in the original.

  26.21    I take _nosce t[ei/e i]psum_ for a precept     Space added.
  176.32   Jesus Christ is come in [t]he flesh            Added.
  183.18   is not only not necessa[a/r]y                  Replaced.
  216.12   a duty of sovere[i]gns                         Inserted.
  248.28   Thus you see the case[ ]put by St. Paul        Inserted.
  270.22   are necess[s]ary.                              Removed.
  333.1    nor had he[ he] received                       Removed.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENGLISH WORKS OF THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY, VOLUME 04 (OF 11) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of The English works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury, Volume 01 (of 11)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The English works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury, Volume 01 (of 11)

Author: Thomas Hobbes

Editor: Sir William Molesworth

Release date: June 20, 2024 [eBook #73877]

Language: English

Original publication: London: John Bohn, 1839

Credits: Emmanuel Ackerman, KD Weeks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENGLISH WORKS OF THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY, VOLUME 01 (OF 11) ***


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_.

This is a very visual work, with numerous diagrams and meticulous
discussion of them. The HTML or eBook versions would be more suitable if
those aspects of the work are of interest.

There is a single footnote following the Translator’s note.

If an article spans several pages, marginal paragraph notes were
repeated. These redundant notes have been removed.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

              The English Works of Thomas Hobbes: Volume 1

[Illustration:

  THOMAS HOBBES.
  _W Humphrys sc._
  _London. Published March 1st 1839, by John Bohn. 17, Henrietta Street,
    Covent Garden._
]

                                  THE

                             ENGLISH WORKS

                                   OF

                             THOMAS HOBBES

                             OF MALMESBURY;

                     NOW FIRST COLLECTED AND EDITED

                                   BY

                     SIR WILLIAM MOLESWORTH, BART.

                                  ---

                                VOL. I.

                                  ---




                                LONDON:
                               JOHN BOHN,
                    HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

                                  ---

                              MDCCCXXXIX.




                                LONDON:
                C. RICHARDS, PRINTER, ST. MARTIN'S LANE.




                                   TO

                           GEORGE GROTE, ESQ.

                      M.P. FOR THE CITY OF LONDON.

                             --------------

DEAR GROTE,

          I dedicate to you this edition of the Works of Hobbes; first,
because I know you will be well pleased to see a complete collection of
all the writings of an Author for whom you have so high an admiration.
Secondly, because I am indebted to you for my first acquaintance with
the speculations of one of the greatest and most original thinkers in
the English language, whose works, I have often heard you regret, were
so scarce, and so much less read and studied than they deserved to be.
It now, therefore, gives me great satisfaction to be able to gratify a
wish, you have frequently expressed, that some person, who had time and
due reverence for that illustrious man, would undertake to edite his
works, and bring his views again before his countrymen, who have so long
and so unjustly neglected him. And likewise, I am desirous, in some way,
to express the sincere regard and respect that I feel for you, and the
gratitude that I owe you for the valuable instruction, that I have
obtained from your society, and from the friendship with which you have
honoured me, during the many years we have been companions in political
life.

                                                Yours, truly,
                                                     WILLIAM MOLESWORTH.

   February 25th, 1839.
79, Eaton Square, London.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                        ELEMENTS OF PHILOSOPHY.

                           THE FIRST SECTION,

                            CONCERNING BODY,

                            WRITTEN IN LATIN

                                   BY

                      THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY

                                  AND

                        TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH.




                                  THE

                       TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.

If, when I had finished my translation of this first section of the
Elements of Philosophy, I had presently committed the same to the press,
it might have come to your hands sooner than now it doth. But as I
undertook it with much diffidence of my own ability to perform it well;
so I thought fit, before I published it, to pray Mr. Hobbes to view,
correct, and order it according to his own mind and pleasure. Wherefore,
though you find some places enlarged, others altered, and two chapters,
XVIII and XX, almost wholly changed, you may nevertheless remain
assured, that as now I present it to you, it doth not at all vary from
the author's own sense and meaning. As for the Six Lessons to the
Savilian Professors at Oxford, they are not of my translation, but were
written, as here you have them in English, by Mr. Hobbes himself; and
are joined to this book, because they are chiefly in defence of the
same.[A]

Footnote A:

  They will be published in a separate volume, with other works of a
  similar description. W. M.


                    THE AUTHOR'S EPISTLE DEDICATORY,

                                 TO THE

                 RIGHT HONORABLE, MY MOST HONORED LORD,

                      WILLIAM, EARL OF DEVONSHIRE.

                                -------

This first section of the Elements of Philosophy, the monument of my
service and your Lordship's bounty, though, after the Third Section
published, long deferred, yet at last finished, I now present, my most
excellent Lord, and dedicate to your Lordship. A little book, but full;
and great enough, if men count well for great; and to an attentive
reader versed in the demonstrations of mathematicians, that is, to your
Lordship, clear and easy to understand, and almost new throughout,
without any offensive novelty. I know that that part of philosophy,
wherein are considered lines and figures, has been delivered to us
notably improved by the ancients; and withal a most perfect pattern of
the logic by which they were enabled to find out and demonstrate such
excellent theorems as they have done. I know also that the hypothesis of
the earth's diurnal motion was the invention of the ancients; but that
both it, and astronomy, that is, celestial physics, springing up
together with it, were by succeeding philosophers strangled with the
snares of words. And therefore the beginning of astronomy, except
observations, I think is not to be derived from farther time than from
Nicolaus Copernicus; who in the age next preceding the present revived
the opinion of Pythagoras, Aristarchus, and Philolaus. After him, the
doctrine of the motion of the earth being now received, and a difficult
question thereupon arising concerning the descent of heavy bodies,
Galileus in our time, striving with that difficulty, was the first that
opened to us the gate of natural philosophy universal, which is the
knowledge of the nature of _motion_. So that neither can the age of
natural philosophy be reckoned higher than to him. Lastly, the science
of _man's body_, the most profitable part of natural science, was first
discovered with admirable sagacity by our countryman Doctor Harvey,
principal Physician to King James and King Charles, in his books of the
_Motion of the Blood_, and of the _Generation of Living Creatures_; who
is the only man I know, that conquering envy, hath established a new
doctrine in his life-time. Before these, there was nothing certain in
natural philosophy but every man's experiments to himself, and the
natural histories, if they may be called certain, that are no certainer
than civil histories. But since these, astronomy and natural philosophy
in general have, for so little time, been extraordinarily advanced by
Joannes Keplerus, Petrus Gassendus, and Marinus Mersennus; and the
science of human bodies in special by the wit and industry of
physicians, the only true natural philosophers, especially of our most
learned men of the College of Physicians in London. Natural Philosophy
is therefore but young; but Civil Philosophy yet much younger, as being
no older (I say it provoked, and that my detractors may know how little
they have wrought upon me) than my own book _De Cive_. But what? were
there no philosophers natural nor civil among the ancient Greeks? There
were men so called; witness Lucian, by whom they are derided; witness
divers cities, from which they have been often by public edicts
banished. But it follows not that there was _philosophy_. There walked
in old Greece a certain phantasm, for superficial gravity, though full
within of fraud and filth, a little like philosophy; which unwary men,
thinking to be it, adhered to the professors of it, some to one, some to
another, though they disagreed among themselves, and with great salary
put their children to them to be taught, instead of wisdom, nothing but
to dispute, and, neglecting the laws, to determine every question
according to their own fancies. The first doctors of the Church, next
the Apostles, born in those times, whilst they endeavoured to defend the
Christian faith against the Gentiles by natural reason, began also to
make use of philosophy, and with the decrees of Holy Scripture to mingle
the sentences of heathen philosophers; and first some harmless ones of
Plato, but afterwards also many foolish and false ones out of the
physics and metaphysics of Aristotle; and bringing in the enemies,
betrayed unto them the citadel of Christianity. From that time, instead
of the worship of God, there entered a thing called _school divinity_,
walking on one foot firmly, which is the Holy Scripture, but halted on
the other rotten foot, which the Apostle Paul called _vain_, and might
have called _pernicious philosophy_; for it hath raised an infinite
number of controversies in the Christian world concerning religion, and
from those controversies, wars. It is like that _Empusa_ in the Athenian
comic poet, which was taken in Athens for a ghost that changed shapes,
having one brazen leg, but the other was the leg of an ass, and was
sent, as was believed, by Hecate, as a sign of some approaching evil
fortune. Against this _Empusa_ I think there cannot be invented a better
exorcism, than to distinguish between the rules of religion, that is,
the rules of honouring God, which we have from the laws, and the rules
of philosophy, that is, the opinions of private men; and to yield what
is due to religion to the Holy Scripture, and what is due to philosophy
to natural reason. And this I shall do, if I but handle the Elements of
Philosophy truly and clearly, as I endeavour to do. Therefore having in
the Third Section, which I have published and dedicated to your
Lordship, long since reduced all power ecclesiastical and civil by
strong arguments of reason, without repugnance to God's word, to one and
the same sovereign authority; I intend now, by putting into a clear
method the true foundations of natural philosophy, to fright and drive
away this metaphysical _Empusa_; not by skirmish, but by letting in the
light upon her. For I am confident, if any confidence of a writing can
proceed from the writer's fear, circumspection, and diffidence, that in
the three former parts of this book all that I have said is sufficiently
demonstrated from definitions; and all in the fourth part from
suppositions not absurd. But if there appear to your Lordship anything
less fully demonstrated than to satisfy every reader, the cause was
this, that I professed to write not all to all, but some things to
geometricians only. But that your Lordship will be satisfied, I cannot
doubt.

There remains the second section, which is concerning _Man_. That part
thereof, where I handle the _Optics_, containing six chapters, together
with the tables of the figures belonging to them, I have already written
and engraven lying by me above these six years. The rest shall, as soon
as I can, be added to it; though by the contumelies and petty injuries
of some unskilful men, I know already, by experience, how much greater
thanks will be due than paid me, for telling men the truth of what men
are. But the burthen I have taken on me I mean to carry through; not
striving to appease, but rather to revenge myself of envy, by encreasing
it. For it contents me that I have your Lordship's favour, which, being
all you require, I acknowledge; and for which, with my prayers to
Almighty God for your Lordship's safety, I shall, to my power, be always
thankful.

                           Your Lordship's most humble servant,

                                                          THOMAS HOBBES.

   London,
April 23, 1655.

                                  THE
                    AUTHOR'S EPISTLE TO THE READER.

Think not, Courteous Reader, that the philosophy, the elements whereof I
am going to set in order, is that which makes philosophers' stones, nor
that which is found in the metaphysic codes; but that it is the natural
reason of man, busily flying up and down among the creatures, and
bringing back a true report of their order, causes and effects.
Philosophy, therefore, the child of the world and your own mind, is
within yourself; perhaps not fashioned yet, but like the world its
father, as it was in the beginning, a thing confused. Do, therefore, as
the statuaries do, who, by hewing off that which is superfluous, do not
make but find the image. Or imitate the creation: if you will be a
philosopher in good earnest, let your reason move upon the deep of your
own cogitations and experience; those things that lie in confusion must
be set asunder, distinguished, and every one stamped with its own name
set in order; that is to say, your method must resemble that of the
creation. The order of the creation was, _light_, _distinction of day
and night_, the _firmament_, the _luminaries_, _sensible creatures_,
_man_; and, after the creation, the _commandment_. Therefore the order
of contemplation will be, _reason_, _definition_, _space_, the _stars_,
_sensible quality_, _man_; and after man is grown up, _subjection to
command_. In the first part of this section, which is entitled Logic, I
set up the light of reason. In the second, which hath for title the
Grounds of Philosophy, I distinguish the most common notions by accurate
definition, for the avoiding of confusion and obscurity. The third part
concerns the expansion of space, that is Geometry. The fourth contains
the Motion of the Stars, together with the doctrine of sensible
qualities.

In the second section, if it please God, shall be handled _Man_. In the
third section, the doctrine of _Subjection_ is handled already. This is
the method I followed; and if it like you, you may use the same; for I
do but propound, not commend to you anything of mine. But whatsoever
shall be the method you will like, I would very fain commend philosophy
to you, that is to say, the study of wisdom, for want of which we have
all suffered much damage lately. For even they, that study wealth, do it
out of love to wisdom; for their treasures serve them but for a
looking-glass, wherein to behold and contemplate their own wisdom. Nor
do they, that love to be employed in public business, aim at anything
but place wherein to show their wisdom. Neither do voluptuous men
neglect philosophy, but only because they know not how great a pleasure
it is to the mind of man to be ravished in the vigorous and perpetual
embraces of the most beauteous world. Lastly, though for nothing else,
yet because the mind of man is no less impatient of empty time than
nature is of empty place, to the end you be not forced for want of what
to do, to be troublesome to men that have business, or take hurt by
falling into idle company, but have somewhat of your own wherewith to
fill up your time, I recommend unto you to study philosophy. Farewell.

                                                               T. H.

                        TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS.


                              PART FIRST,

                               OR LOGIC.


    CHAP.                                                     PAGE.

       1. Of Philosophy                                           1

       2. Of Names                                               13

       3. Of Proposition                                         29

       4. Of Syllogism                                           44

       5. Of Erring, Falsity, and Captions                       55

       6. Of Method                                              65


                             PART SECOND,

                  OR THE FIRST GROUNDS OF PHILOSOPHY.

       7. Of Place and Time                                      91

       8. Of Body and Accident                                  101

       9. Of Cause and Effect                                   120

      10. Of Power and Act                                      127

      11. Of Identity and Difference                            132

      12. Of Quantity                                           138

      13. Of Analogism, or the Same Proportion                  144

      14. Of Strait and Crooked, Angle and Figure               176


                              PART THIRD,

             OF THE PROPORTIONS OF MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES.

      15. Of the Nature, Properties, and divers                 203
          Considerations of Motion and Endeavour

      16. Of Motion Accelerated and Uniform, and of Motion      218
          by Concourse

      17. Of Figures Deficient                                  246

      18. Of the Equation of Strait Lines with the Crooked      268
          Lines of Parabolas, and other Figures made in
          imitation of Parabolas

      19. Of Angles of Incidence and Reflection, equal by       273
          Supposition

      20. Of the Dimension of a Circle, and the Division of     287
          Angles or Arches

      21. Of Circular Motion                                    317

      22. Of other Variety of Motions                           333

      23. Of the Centre of Equiponderation of Bodies            350
          pressing downwards in Strait Parallel Lines

      24. Of Refraction and Reflection                          374


                             PART FOURTH,

                OF PHYSICS, OR THE PHENOMENA OF NATURE.

      25. Of Sense and Animal Motion                            387

      26. Of the World and of the Stars                         410

      27. Of Light, Heat, and of Colours                        445

      28. Of Cold, Wind, Hard, Ice, Restitution of Bodies       466
          bent, Diaphanous, Lightning and Thunder, and of
          the Heads of Rivers

      29. Of Sound, Odour, Savour, and Touch                    485

      30. Of Gravity                                            508

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         COMPUTATION OR LOGIC.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER I.

                             OF PHILOSOPHY.

1. The Introduction.—2. The Definition of Philosophy explained.—3.
    Ratiocination of the Mind.—4. Properties, what they are.—5. How
    Properties are known by Generation, and contrarily.—6. The Scope of
    Philosophy.—7. The Utility of it.—8. The Subject.—9. The Parts of
    it.—10. The Epilogue.


[Sidenote: Introduction.]

Philosophy seems to me to be amongst men now, in the same manner as corn
and wine are said to have been in the world in ancient time. For from
the beginning there were vines and ears of corn growing here and there
in the fields; but no care was taken for the planting and sowing of
them. Men lived therefore upon acorns; or if any were so bold as to
venture upon the eating of those unknown and doubtful fruits, they did
it with danger of their health. In like manner, every man brought
Philosophy, that is, Natural Reason, into the world with him; for all
men can reason to some degree, and concerning some things: but where
there is need of a long series of reasons, there most men wander out of
the way, and fall into error for want of method, as it were for want of
sowing and planting, that is, of improving their reason. And from hence
it comes to pass, that they who content themselves with daily
experience, which may be likened to feeding upon acorns, and either
reject, or not much regard philosophy, are commonly esteemed, and are,
indeed, men of sounder judgment than those who, from opinions, though
not vulgar, yet full of uncertainty, and carelessly received, do nothing
but dispute and wrangle, like men that are not well in their wits. I
confess, indeed, that that part of philosophy by which magnitudes and
figures are computed, is highly improved. But because I have not
observed the like advancement in the other parts of it, my purpose is,
as far forth as I am able, to lay open the few and first Elements of
Philosophy in general, as so many seeds from which pure and true
Philosophy may hereafter spring up by little and little.

I am not ignorant how hard a thing it is to weed out of men's minds such
inveterate opinions as have taken root there, and been confirmed in them
by the authority of most eloquent writers; especially seeing true (that
is, accurate) Philosophy professedly rejects not only the paint and
false colours of language, but even the very ornaments and graces of the
same; and the first grounds of all science are not only not beautiful,
but poor, arid, and, in appearance, deformed. Nevertheless, there being
certainly some men, though but few, who are delighted with truth and
strength of reason in all things, I thought I might do well to take this
pains for the sake even of those few. I proceed therefore to the matter,
and take my beginning from the very definition of philosophy, which is
this.

[Sidenote: Definition of Philosophy explained.]

2. PHILOSOPHY _is such knowledge of effects or appearances, as we
acquire by true ratiocination from the knowledge we have first of their
causes or generation; And again, of such causes or generations as may be
from knowing first their effects_.

For the better understanding of which definition, we must consider,
first, that although Sense and Memory of things, which are common to man
and all living creatures, be knowledge, yet because they are given us
immediately by nature, and not gotten by ratiocination, they are not
philosophy.

Secondly, seeing Experience is nothing but memory; and Prudence, or
prospect into the future time, nothing but expectation of such things as
we have already had experience of, Prudence also is not to be esteemed
philosophy.

By RATIOCINATION, I mean _computation_. Now to compute, is either to
collect the sum of many things that are added together, or to know what
remains when one thing is taken out of another. _Ratiocination_,
therefore, is the same with _addition_ and _substraction_; and if any
man add _multiplication_ and _division_, I will not be against it,
seeing multiplication is nothing but addition of equals one to another,
and division nothing but a substraction of equals one from another, as
often as is possible. So that all ratiocination is comprehended in these
two operations of the mind, addition and substraction.

[Sidenote: Ratiocination of the Mind.]

3. But how by the _ratiocination_ of our mind, we add and substract in
our silent thoughts, without the use of words, it will be necessary for
me to make intelligible by an example or two. If therefore a man see
something afar off and obscurely, although no appellation had yet been
given to anything, he will, notwithstanding, have the same idea of that
thing for which now, by imposing a name on it, we call it _body_. Again,
when, by coming nearer, he sees the same thing thus and thus, now in one
place and now in another, he will have a new idea thereof, namely, that
for which we now call such a thing _animated_. Thirdly, when standing
nearer, he perceives the figure, hears the voice, and sees other things
which are signs of a rational mind, he has a third idea, though it have
yet no appellation, namely, that for which we now call anything
_rational_. Lastly, when, by looking fully and distinctly upon it, he
conceives all that he has seen as one thing, the idea he has now is
compounded of his former ideas, which are put together in the mind in
the same order in which these three single names, _body_, _animated_,
_rational_, are in speech compounded into this one name,
_body-animated-rational_, or _man_. In like manner, of the several
conceptions of _four sides, equality of sides, and right angles_, is
compounded the conception of a _square_. For the mind may conceive a
figure of four sides without any conception of their equality, and of
that equality without conceiving a right angle; and may join together
all these single conceptions into one conception or one idea of a
square. And thus we see how the conceptions of the mind are compounded.
Again, whosoever sees a man standing near him, conceives the whole idea
of that man; and if, as he goes away, he follow him with his eyes only,
he will lose the idea of those things which were signs of his being
rational, whilst, nevertheless, the idea of a body-animated remains
still before his eyes, so that the idea of rational is substracted from
the whole idea of man, that is to say, of body-animated-rational, and
there remains that of body-animated; and a while after, at a greater
distance, the idea of animated will be lost, and that of body only will
remain; so that at last, when nothing at all can be seen, the whole idea
will vanish out of sight. By which examples, I think, it is manifest
enough what is the internal ratiocination of the mind without words.

We must not therefore think that computation, that is, ratiocination,
has place only in numbers, as if man were distinguished from other
living creatures (which is said to have been the opinion of
_Pythagoras_) by nothing but the faculty of numbering; for _magnitude,
body, motion, time, degrees of quality, action, conception, proportion,
speech and names_ (in which all the kinds of philosophy consist) are
capable of addition and substraction. Now such things as we add or
substract, that is, which we put into an account, we are said to
_consider_, in Greek λογίζεσθαι, in which language also συλλογίζεσθαι
signifies to _compute_, _reason_, or _reckon_.

[Sidenote: Properties, what they are.]

4. But _effects_ and the _appearances_ of things to sense, are faculties
or powers of bodies, which make us distinguish them from one another;
that is to say, conceive one body to be equal or unequal, like or unlike
to another body; as in the example above, when by coming near enough to
any body, we perceive the motion and going of the same, we distinguish
it thereby from a tree, a column, and other fixed bodies; and so that
motion or going is the _property_ thereof, as being proper to living
creatures, and a faculty by which they make us distinguish them from
other bodies.

[Sidenote: How Properties are known by Generation, and contrarily.]

5. How the knowledge of any effect may be gotten from the knowledge of
the generation thereof, may easily be understood by the example of a
circle: for if there be set before us a plain figure, having, as near as
may be, the figure of a circle, we cannot possibly perceive by sense
whether it be a true circle or no; than which, nevertheless, nothing is
more easy to be known to him that knows first the generation of the
propounded figure. For let it be known that the figure was made by the
circumduction of a body whereof one end remained unmoved, and we may
reason thus; a body carried about, retaining always the same length,
applies itself first to one _radius_, then to another, to a third, a
fourth, and successively to all; and, therefore, the same length, from
the same point, toucheth the circumference in every part thereof, which
is as much as to say, as all the _radii_ are equal. We know, therefore,
that from such generation proceeds a figure, from whose one middle point
all the extreme points are reached unto by equal _radii_. And in like
manner, by knowing first what figure is set before us, we may come by
ratiocination to some generation of the same, though perhaps not that by
which it was made, yet that by which it might have been made; for he
that knows that a circle has the property above declared, will easily
know whether a body carried about, as is said, will generate a circle or
no.

[Sidenote: Scope of Philosophy.]

6. The _end_ or _scope_ of philosophy is, that we may make use to our
benefit of effects formerly seen; or that, by application of bodies to
one another, we may produce the like effects of those we conceive in our
mind, as far forth as matter, strength, and industry, will permit, for
the commodity of human life. For the inward glory and triumph of mind
that a man may have for the mastering of some difficult and doubtful
matter, or for the discovery of some hidden truth, is not worth so much
pains as the study of Philosophy requires; nor need any man care much to
teach another what he knows himself, if he think that will be the only
benefit of his labour. The end of knowledge is power; and the use of
theorems (which, among geometricians, serve for the finding out of
properties) is for the construction of problems; and, lastly, the scope
of all speculation is the performing of some action, or thing to be
done.

[Sidenote: Utility of Philosophy.]

7. But what the _utility_ of philosophy is, especially of natural
philosophy and geometry, will be best understood by reckoning up the
chief commodities of which mankind is capable, and by comparing the
manner of life of such as enjoy them, with that of others which want the
same. Now, the greatest commodities of mankind are the arts; namely, of
measuring matter and motion; of moving ponderous bodies; of
architecture; of navigation; of making instruments for all uses; of
calculating the celestial motions, the aspects of the stars, and the
parts of time; of geography, &c. By which sciences, how great benefits
men receive is more easily understood than expressed. These benefits are
enjoyed by almost all the people of Europe, by most of those of Asia,
and by some of Africa: but the Americans, and they that live near the
Poles, do totally want them. But why? Have they sharper wits than these?
Have not all men one kind of soul, and the same faculties of mind? What,
then, makes this difference, except philosophy? Philosophy, therefore,
is the cause of all these benefits. But the utility of moral and civil
philosophy is to be estimated, not so much by the commodities we have by
knowing these sciences, as by the calamities we receive from not knowing
them. Now, all such calamities as may be avoided by human industry,
arise from war, but chiefly from civil war; for from this proceed
slaughter, solitude, and the want of all things. But the cause of war is
not that men are willing to have it; for the will has nothing for object
but good, at least that which seemeth good. Nor is it from this, that
men know not that the effects of war are evil; for who is there that
thinks not poverty and loss of life to be great evils? The cause,
therefore, of civil war is, that men know not the causes neither of war
nor peace, there being but few in the world that have learned those
duties which unite and keep men in peace, that is to say, that have
learned the rules of civil life sufficiently. Now, the knowledge of
these rules is moral philosophy. But why have they not learned them,
unless for this reason, that none hitherto have taught them in a clear
and exact method? For what shall we say? Could the ancient masters of
Greece, Egypt, Rome, and others, persuade the unskilful multitude to
their innumerable opinions concerning the nature of their gods, which
they themselves knew not whether they were true or false, and which were
indeed manifestly false and absurd; and could they not persuade the same
multitude to civil duty, if they themselves had understood it? Or shall
those few writings of geometricians which are extant, be thought
sufficient for the taking away of all controversy in the matters they
treat of, and shall those innumerable and huge volumes of _ethics_ be
thought unsufficient, if what they teach had been certain and well
demonstrated? What, then, can be imagined to be the cause that the
writings of those men have increased science, and the writings of these
have increased nothing but words, saving that the former were written by
men that knew, and the latter by such as knew not, the doctrine they
taught only for ostentation of their wit and eloquence? Nevertheless, I
deny not but the reading of some such books is very delightful; for they
are most eloquently written, and contain many clear, wholesome and
choice sentences, which yet are not universally true, though by them
universally pronounced. From whence it comes to pass, that the
circumstances of times, places, and persons being changed, they are no
less frequently made use of to confirm wicked men in their purposes,
than to make them understand the precepts of civil duties. Now that
which is chiefly wanting in them, is a true and certain rule of our
actions, by which we might know whether that we undertake be just or
unjust. For it is to no purpose to be bidden in every thing to do right,
before there be a certain rule and measure of right established, which
no man hitherto hath established. Seeing, therefore, from the not
knowing of civil duties, that is, from the want of moral science,
proceed civil wars, and the greatest calamities of mankind, we may very
well attribute to such science the production of the contrary
commodities. And thus much is sufficient, to say nothing of the praises
and other contentment proceeding from philosophy, to let you see the
utility of the same in every kind thereof.

[Sidenote: Subject of Philosophy.]

8. The _subject_ of Philosophy, or the matter it treats of, is every
body of which we can conceive any generation, and which we may, by any
consideration thereof, compare with other bodies, or which is capable of
composition and resolution; that is to say, every body of whose
generation or properties we can have any knowledge. And this may be
deduced from the definition of philosophy, whose profession it is to
search out the properties of bodies from their generation, or their
generation from their properties; and, therefore, where there is no
generation or property, there is no philosophy. Therefore it excludes
_Theology_, I mean the doctrine of God, eternal, ingenerable,
incomprehensible, and in whom there is nothing neither to divide nor
compound, nor any generation to be conceived.

It excludes the doctrine of _angels_, and all such things as are thought
to be neither bodies nor properties of bodies; there being in them no
place neither for composition nor division, nor any capacity of more and
less, that is to say, no place for ratiocination.

It excludes _history_, as well _natural_ as _political_, though most
useful (nay necessary) to philosophy; because such knowledge is but
experience, or authority, and not ratiocination.

It excludes all such knowledge as is acquired by Divine inspiration, or
revelation, as not derived to us by reason, but by Divine grace in an
instant, and, as it were, by some sense supernatural.

It excludes not only all doctrines which are false, but such also as are
not well-grounded; for whatsoever we know by right ratiocination, can
neither be false nor doubtful; and, therefore, _astrology_, as it is now
held forth, and all such divinations rather than sciences, are excluded.

Lastly, the doctrine of _God's worship_ is excluded from philosophy, as
being not to be known by natural reason, but by the authority of the
Church; and as being the object of faith, and not of knowledge.

[Sidenote: Parts of Philosophy.]

9. The principal parts of philosophy are two. For two chief kinds of
bodies, and very different from one another, offer themselves to such as
search after their generation and properties; one whereof being the work
of nature, is called a _natural body_, the other is called a
_commonwealth_, and is made by the wills and agreement of men. And from
these spring the two parts of philosophy, called _natural_ and _civil_.
But seeing that, for the knowledge of the properties of a commonwealth,
it is necessary first to know the dispositions, affections, and manners
of men, civil philosophy is again commonly divided into two parts,
whereof one, which treats of men's dispositions and manners, is called
_ethics_; and the other, which takes cognizance of their civil duties,
is called _politics_, or simply _civil philosophy_. In the first place,
therefore (after I have set down such premises as appertain to the
nature of philosophy in general), I will discourse of _bodies natural_;
in the second, of the _dispositions and manners of men_; and in the
third, of the _civil duties of subjects_.

[Sidenote: Epilogue.]

10. To conclude; seeing there may be many who will not like this my
definition of philosophy, and will say, that, from the liberty which a
man may take of so defining as seems best to himself, he may conclude
any thing from any thing (though I think it no hard matter to
demonstrate that this definition of mine agrees with the sense of all
men); yet, lest in this point there should be any cause of dispute
betwixt me and them, I here undertake no more than to deliver the
elements of that science by which the effects of anything may be found
out from the known generation of the same, or contrarily, the generation
from the effects; to the end that they who search after other
philosophy, may be admonished to seek it from other principles.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER II.

                               OF NAMES.

1. The necessity of sensible Moniments or Marks for the help of Memory:
    a Mark defined.—2. The necessity of Marks for the signification of
    the conceptions of the Mind.—3. Names supply both those
    necessities.—4. The Definition of a Name.—5. Names are Signs not of
    Things, but of our Cogitations.—6. What it is we give Names to.—7.
    Names Positive and Negative.—8. Contradictory Names.—9. A Common
    Name.—10. Names of the First and Second Intention.—11. Universal,
    Particular, Individual, and Indefinite Names.—12. Names Univocal and
    Equivocal.—13. Absolute and Relative Names.—14. Simple and
    Compounded Names.—15. A Predicament described.—16. Some things to be
    noted concerning Predicaments.


[Sidenote: Necessity of sensible Moniments or Marks for the help of
           Memory.]

1. How unconstant and fading men's thoughts are, and how much the
recovery of them depends upon chance, there is none but knows by
infallible experience in himself. For no man is able to remember
quantities without sensible and present measures, nor colours without
sensible and present patterns, nor number without the names of numbers
disposed in order and learned by heart. So that whatsoever a man has put
together in his mind by ratiocination without such helps, will presently
slip from him, and not be revocable but by beginning his ratiocination
anew. From which it follows, that, for the acquiring of philosophy, some
sensible moniments are necessary, by which our past thoughts may be not
only reduced, but also registered every one in its own order.[Sidenote:
A Mark defined] These moniments I call MARKS, namely, sensible things
taken at pleasure, that, by the sense of them, such thoughts may be
recalled to our mind as are like those thoughts for which we took them.

[Sidenote: Necessity of Marks for the signification of the conceptions
           of the Mind.]

2. Again, though some one man, of how excellent a wit soever, should
spend all his time partly in reasoning, and partly in inventing marks
for the help of his memory, and advancing himself in learning; who sees
not that the benefit he reaps to himself will not be much, and to others
none at all? For unless he communicate his notes with others, his
science will perish with him. But if the same notes be made common to
many, and so one man's inventions be taught to others, sciences will
thereby be increased to the general good of mankind. It is therefore
necessary, for the acquiring of philosophy, that there be certain signs,
by which what one man finds out may be manifested and made known to
others. Now, those things we call SIGNS are the _antecedents of their
consequents, and the consequents of their antecedents, as often as we
observe them to go before or follow after in the same manner_. For
example, a thick cloud is a sign of rain to follow, and rain a sign that
a cloud has gone before, for this reason only, that we seldom see clouds
without the consequence of rain, nor rain at any time but when a cloud
has gone before. And of signs, some are _natural_, whereof I have
already given an example, others are _arbitrary_, namely, those we make
choice of at our own pleasure, as a bush hung up, signifies that wine is
to be sold there; a stone set in the ground signifies the bound of a
field; and words so and so connected, signify the cogitations and
motions of our mind. The difference, therefore, betwixt marks and signs
is this, that we make those for our own use, but these for the use of
others.

[Sidenote: Names supply both those necessities.]

3. Words so connected as that they become signs of our thoughts, are
called SPEECH, of which every part is a _name_. But seeing (as is said)
both marks and signs are necessary for the acquiring of philosophy,
(marks by which we may remember our own thoughts, and signs by which we
may make our thoughts known to others), names do both these offices; but
they serve for marks before they be used as signs. For though a man were
alone in the world, they would be useful to him in helping him to
remember; but to teach others, (unless there were some others to be
taught) of no use at all. Again, names, though standing singly by
themselves, are marks, because they serve to recal our own thoughts to
mind; but they cannot be signs, otherwise than by being disposed and
ordered in speech as parts of the same. For example, a man may begin
with a word, whereby the hearer may frame an idea of something in his
mind, which, nevertheless, he cannot conceive to be the idea which was
in the mind of him that spake, but that he would say something which
began with that word, though perhaps not as by itself, but as part of
another word. So that the nature of a name consists principally in this,
that it is a mark taken for memory's sake; but it serves also by
accident to signify and make known to others what we remember ourselves,
and, therefore, I will define it thus:

[Sidenote: Definition of a Name.]

4. _A_ NAME _is a word taken at pleasure to serve for a mark, which may
raise in our mind a thought like to some thought we had before, and
which being pronounced to others, may be to them a sign of what thought
the speaker had, or had not before in his mind_. And it is for brevity's
sake that I suppose the original of names to be arbitrary, judging it a
thing that may be assumed as unquestionable. For considering that new
names are daily made, and old ones laid aside; that diverse nations use
different names, and how impossible it is either to observe similitude,
or make any comparison betwixt a name and a thing, how can any man
imagine that the names of things were imposed from their natures? For
though some names of living creatures and other things, which our first
parents used, were taught by God himself; yet they were by him
arbitrarily imposed, and afterwards, both at the Tower of Babel, and
since, in process of time, growing everywhere out of use, are quite
forgotten, and in their room have succeeded others, invented and
received by men at pleasure. Moreover, whatsoever the common use of
words be, yet philosophers, who were to teach their knowledge to others,
had always the liberty, and sometimes they both had and will have a
necessity, of taking to themselves such names as they please for the
signifying of their meaning, if they would have it understood. Nor had
mathematicians need to ask leave of any but themselves to name the
figures they invented, _parabolas_, _hyperboles_, _cissoeides_,
_quadratices_, &c. or to call one magnitude A, another B.

[Sidenote: Names are signs not of things, but of our cogitations.]

5. But seeing names ordered in speech (as is defined) are signs of our
conceptions, it is manifest they are not signs of the things themselves;
for that the sound of this word _stone_ should be the sign of a stone,
cannot be understood in any sense but this, that he that hears it
collects that he that pronounces it thinks of a stone. And, therefore,
that disputation, whether names signify the matter or form, or something
compounded of both, and other like subtleties of the _metaphysics_, is
kept up by erring men, and such as understand not the words they dispute
about.

[Sidenote: What it is we give names to.]

6. Nor, indeed, is it at all necessary that every name should be the
name of something. For as these, a _man_, a _tree_, a _stone_, are the
names of the things themselves, so the images of a man, of a tree, and
of a stone, which are represented to men sleeping, have their names
also, though they be not things, but only fictions and phantasms of
things. For we can remember these; and, therefore, it is no less
necessary that they have names to mark and signify them, than the things
themselves. Also this word _future_ is a name, but no future thing has
yet any being, nor do we know whether that which we call future, shall
ever have a being or no. Nevertheless, seeing we use in our mind to knit
together things past with those that are present, the name _future_
serves to signify such knitting together. Moreover, that which neither
is, nor has been, nor ever shall, or ever can be, has a name, namely,
_that which neither is nor has been_, &c.; or more briefly this,
_impossible_. To conclude; this word _nothing_ is a name, which yet
cannot be the name of any thing: for when, for example, we substract 2
and 3 from 5, and so nothing remaining, we would call that substraction
to mind, this speech _nothing remains_, and in it the word _nothing_ is
not unuseful. And for the same reason we say truly, _less than nothing_
remains, when we substract more from less; for the mind feigns such
remains as these for doctrine's sake, and desires, as often as is
necessary, to call the same to memory. But seeing every name has some
relation to that which is named, though that which we name be not always
a thing that has a being in nature, yet it is lawful for doctrine's sake
to apply the word _thing_ to whatsoever we name; as if it were all one
whether that thing be truly existent, or be only feigned.

[Sidenote: Names Positive and Negative.]

7. The first distinction of names is, that some are _positive_, or
_affirmative_, others _negative_, which are also called _privative_ and
_indefinite_. _Positive_ are such as we impose for the likeness,
equality, or identity of the things we consider; _negative_, for the
diversity, unlikeness, or inequality of the same. Examples of the former
are, _a man_, _a philosopher_; for a _man_ denotes any one of a
multitude of men, and _a philosopher_, any one of many philosophers, by
reason of their similitude; also, _Socrates_ is a positive name, because
it signifies always one and the same man. Examples of _negatives_ are
such positives as have the negative particle _not_ added to them, as
_not-man_, _not-philosopher_. But positives were before negatives; for
otherwise there could have been no use at all of these. For when the
name of _white_ was imposed upon certain things, and afterwards upon
other things, the names of _black_, _blue_, _transparent_, _&c._ the
infinite dissimilitudes of these with _white_ could not be comprehended
in any one name, save that which had in it the negation of white, that
is to say, the name _not-white_, or some other equivalent to it, in
which the word _white_ is repeated, such as _unlike to white_, _&c._ And
by these _negative names_, we take notice ourselves, and signify to
others what we have not thought of.

[Sidenote: Contradictory names.]

8. Positive and negative names are _contradictory_ to one another, so
that they cannot both be the name of the same thing. Besides, of
contradictory names, one is the name of anything whatsoever; for
whatsoever is, is either man, or not-man, white or not-white, and so of
the rest. And this is so manifest, that it needs no farther proof or
explication; for they that say _the same thing cannot both be, and not
be_, speak obscurely; but they that say, _whatsoever is, either is, or
is not_, speak also absurdly and ridiculously. The certainty of this
axiom, viz. _of two contradictory names, one is the name of anything
whatsoever, the other not_, is the original and foundation of all
ratiocination, that is, of all philosophy; and therefore it ought to be
so exactly propounded, that it may be of itself clear and perspicuous to
all men; as indeed it is, saving to such, as reading the long discourses
made upon this subject by the writers of _metaphysics_ (which they
believe to be some egregious learning) think they understand not, when
they do.

[Sidenote: A common name.]

9. Secondly, of names, some are _common_ to many things, as a _man_, _a
tree_; others _proper_ to one thing, as _he that writ the Iliad_,
_Homer_, _this man_, _that man_. And a common name, being the name of
many things severally taken, but not collectively of all together (as
man is not the name of all mankind, but of every one, as of Peter, John,
and the rest severally) is therefore called an _universal name_; and
therefore this word _universal_ is never the name of any thing existent
in nature, nor of any idea or phantasm formed in the mind, but always
the name of some word or name; so that when _a living creature_, _a
stone_, _a spirit_, or any other thing, is said to be _universal_, it is
not to be understood, that any man, stone, &c. ever was or can be
universal, but only that these words, _living creature_, _stone_, _&c._
are _universal names_, that is, names common to many things; and the
conceptions answering them in our mind, are the images and phantasms of
several living creatures, or other things. And therefore, for the
understanding of the extent of an universal name, we need no other
faculty but that of our imagination, by which we remember that such
names bring sometimes one thing, sometimes another, into our mind. Also
of common names, some are more, some less common. _More common_, is that
which is the name of more things; _less common_, the name of fewer
things; as _living creature_ is more common than _man_, or _horse_, or
_lion_, because it comprehends them all: and therefore a more common
name, in respect of a less common, is called the _genus_, or a _general
name_; and this in respect of that, the _species_, or a _special name_.

[Sidenote: Names of the first and second intention.]

10. And from hence proceeds the third distinction of names, which is,
that some are called names of the _first_, others of the _second
intention_. Of the _first intention_ are the names of things, a _man_,
_stone_, _&c._: of the _second_ are the names of names and speeches, as
_universal_, _particular_, _genus_, _species_, _syllogism_, and the
like. But it is hard to say why those are called names of the _first_,
and these of the _second intention_, unless perhaps it was first
intended by us to give names to those things which are of daily use in
this life, and afterwards to such things as appertain to science, that
is, that our second intention was to give names to names. But whatsoever
the cause hereof may be, yet this is manifest, that _genus_, _species_,
_definition_, _&c._ are names of words and names only; and therefore to
put _genus_ and _species_ for things, and _definition_ for the nature of
any thing, as the writers of _metaphysics_ have done, is not right,
seeing they be only significations of what we think of the nature of
things.

[Sidenote: Universal, particular, individual, and indefinite names.]

11. Fourthly, some names are of _certain_ and _determined_, others of
_uncertain_ and _undetermined_ signification. Of _determined_ and
_certain_ signification is, first, that name which is given to any one
thing by itself, and is called an _individual name_; as _Homer_, _this
tree_, _that living creature_, &c. Secondly that which has any of these
words, _all_, _every_, _both_, _either_, or the like added to it; and it
is therefore called an universal name, because it signifies every one of
those things to which it is common; and of _certain_ signification for
this reason, that he which hears, conceives in his mind the same thing
that he which speaks would have him conceive. Of _indefinite_
signification is, first, that name which has the word _some_, or the
like added to it, and is called a _particular name_; secondly, a common
name set by itself without any note either of universality or
particularity, as _man_, _stone_, and is called an _indefinite name_;
but both _particular_ and _indefinite_ names are of uncertain
signification, because the hearer knows not what thing it is the speaker
would have him conceive; and therefore in speech, particular and
indefinite names are to be esteemed equivalent to one another. But these
words, _all_, _every_, _some_, _&c._ which denote universality and
particularity, are not names, but parts only of names; so that _every
man_, and _that man which the hearer conceives in his mind_, are all
one; and _some man_, and _that man which the speaker thought of_,
signify the same. From whence it is evident, that the use of signs of
this kind, is not for a man's own sake, or for his getting of knowledge
by his own private meditation (for every man has his own thoughts
sufficiently determined without such helps as these) but for the sake of
others; that is, for the teaching and signifying of our conceptions to
others; nor were they invented only to make us remember, but to make us
able to discourse with others.

[Sidenote: Names univocal and equivocal.]

12. Fifthly, names are usually distinguished into _univocal_ and
_equivocal_. _Univocal_ are those which in the same train of discourse
signify always the same thing; but _equivocal_ those which mean
sometimes one thing and sometimes another. Thus, the name _triangle_ is
said to be _univocal_, because it is always taken in the same sense; and
_parabola_ to be _equivocal_, for the signification it has sometimes of
allegory or similitude, and sometimes of a certain geometrical figure.
Also every _metaphor_ is by profession _equivocal_. But this distinction
belongs not so much to names, as to those that use names, for some use
them properly and accurately for the finding out of truth; others draw
them from their proper sense, for ornament or deceit.

[Sidenote: Absolute and relative names.]

13. Sixthly, of names, some are _absolute_, others _relative_.
_Relative_ are such as are imposed for some comparison, as _father_,
_son_, _cause_, _effect_, _like_, _unlike_, _equal_, _unequal_,
_master_, _servant_, _&c._ And those that signify no comparison at all
are _absolute names_. But, as it was noted above, that universality is
to be attributed to words and names only, and not to things, so the same
is to be said of other distinctions of names; for no things are either
_univocal_ or _equivocal_, or _relative_ or _absolute_. There is also
another distinction of names into _concrete_ and _abstract_; but because
abstract names proceed from proposition, and can have no place where
there is no affirmation, I shall speak of them hereafter.

[Sidenote: Simple and compounded names.]

14. Lastly, there are _simple_ and _compounded names_. But here it is to
be noted, that a name is not taken in philosophy, as in grammar, for one
single word, but for any number of words put together to signify one
thing; for among philosophers _sentient animated body_ passes but for
one name, being the name of every living creature, which yet, among
grammarians, is accounted three names. Also a _simple name_ is not here
distinguished from a _compounded name_ by a preposition, as in grammar.
But I call a _simple name_, that which in every kind is the most common
or most universal; and that a _compounded name_, which by the joining of
another name to it, is made less universal, and signifies that more
conceptions than one were in the mind, for which that latter name was
added. For example, in the conception of _man_ (as is shown in the
former chapter.) First, he is conceived to be something that has
extension, which is marked by the word _body_. _Body_, therefore, is a
_simple name_, being put for that first single conception; afterwards,
upon the sight of such and such motion, another conception arises, for
which he is called an _animated body_; and this I here call a
_compounded name_, as I do also the name _animal_, which is equivalent
to an _animated body_. And, in the same manner, an _animated rational
body_, as also a _man_, which is equivalent to it, is a more compounded
name. And by this we see how the composition of conceptions in the mind
is answerable to the composition of names; for, as in the mind one idea
or phantasm succeeds to another, and to this a third; so to one name is
added another and another successively, and of them all is made one
_compounded_ name. Nevertheless we must not think bodies which are
without the mind, are compounded in the same manner, namely, that there
is in nature a body, or any other imaginable thing existent, which at
the first has no magnitude, and then, by the addition of magnitude,
comes to have quantity, and by more or less quantity to have density or
rarity; and again, by the addition of figure, to be figurate, and after
this, by the injection of light or colour, to become lucid or coloured;
though such has been the philosophy of many.

[Sidenote: A predicament described.]

15. The writers of _logic_ have endeavoured to digest the names of all
the kinds of things into certain _scales_ or degrees, by the continual
subordination of names less common, to names more common. In the scale
of _bodies_ they put in the first and highest place _body_ simply, and
in the next place under it less common names, by which it may be more
limited and determined, namely _animated_ and _inanimated_, and so on
till they come to _individuals_. In like manner, in the scale of
_quantities_, they assign the first place to _quantity_, and the next to
_line_, _superficies_, and _solid_, which are names of less latitude;
and these orders or scales of names they usually call _predicaments_ and
_categories_. And of this ordination not only positive, but negative
names also are capable; which may be exemplified by such forms of the
_predicaments_ as follow:

                  THE FORM OF THE PREDICAMENT OF BODY.

      Not-Body, or
        Accident.
             { Not animated.
      Body   {            { Not living Creature.
             { Animated   {
                          { Living     { Not Man.
                          {  Creature  {            { Not Peter.
                                       { Man        {
                                                    { Peter.

                        {                      { Quantity, or so much.
 Both Accident and Body { Absolutely, as       {
 are considered         {          or          { Quality, or such.
                        { Comparatively, which is called their Relation.

                THE FORM OF THE PREDICAMENT OF QUANTITY.

            { Not continual,
            { as Number.                        { Line.
 Quantity.  {                 { Of itself, as   { Superficies.
            {                 {                 { Solid.
            { Continual       {
                              {                 { Time, by Line.
                              {                 { Motion, by Line and
                              { By accident, as {   Time.
                                                { Force, by Motion and
                                                {   Solid.

Where, it is to be noted, that _line_, _superficies_, and _solid_, may
be said to be of such and such quantity, that is, to be originally and
of their own nature capable of equality and inequality; but we cannot
say there is either majority or minority, or equality, or indeed any
quantity at all, in _time_, without the help of _line_ and _motion_; nor
in _motion_, without _line_ and _time_; nor in _force_, otherwise than
by _motion_ and _solid_.

                THE FORM OF THE PREDICAMENT OF QUALITY.

                                         { Seeing.
                                         { Hearing.
                          { Primary      { Smelling.
                          {              { Tasting.
           { Perception   {              { Touching.
           {  by Sense    {
           {              {              { Imagination.
           {              { Secondary    { Affection    { pleasant.
  Quality  {                             {              { unpleasant.
           {              { By Seeing, as Light and Colour.
           {              { By Hearing, as Sound.
           { Sensible     { By Smelling, as Odours.
           {  Quality     { By Tasting, as Savours.
                          { By Touching, as Hardness, Heat,
                          {  Cold, &c.

                THE FORM OF THE PREDICAMENT OF RELATION.

              { Magnitudes, as Equality and Inequality.
              { Qualities, as Likeness and Unlikeness.
 Relation of  {            { Together     { In Place.
              {            {              { In Time.
              { Order      {
                           {              { In Place     { Former.
                           { Not together {              { Later
                                          { In Time      { Former.
                                                         { Later

[Sidenote: Some things to be noted concerning predicaments.]

16. Concerning which predicaments it is to be noted, in the first place,
that as the division is made in the first predicament into contradictory
names, so it might have been done in the rest. For, as there, _body_ is
divided into _animated_ and _not-animated_, so, in the second
predicament, _continual quantity_ may be divided into _line_ and
_not-line_, and again, _not-line_ into _superficies_ and
_not-superficies_, and so in the rest; but it was not necessary.

Secondly, it is to be observed, that of _positive_ names the former
comprehends the latter; but of _negatives_ the former is comprehended by
the latter. For example, _living-creature_ is the name of every man, and
therefore it comprehends the name _man_; but, on the contrary, _not-man_
is the name of everything which is not-living-creature, and therefore
the name _not-living-creature_, which is put first, is comprehended by
the latter name, _not-man_.

Thirdly, we must take heed that we do not think, that as names, so the
diversities of things themselves may be searched out and determined by
such distinctions as these; or that arguments may be taken from hence
(as some have done ridiculously) to prove that the kinds of things are
not infinite.

Fourthly, I would not have any man think I deliver the forms above for a
true and exact ordination of names; for this cannot be performed as long
as philosophy remains imperfect; nor that by placing (for example)
_light_ in the predicament of _qualities_, while another places the same
in the predicament of bodies, I pretend that either of us ought for this
to be drawn from his opinion; for this is to be done only by arguments
and ratiocination, and not by disposing of words into _classes_.

Lastly, I confess I have not yet seen any great use of the predicaments
in philosophy. I believe _Aristotle_ when he saw he could not digest the
things themselves into such orders, might nevertheless desire out of his
own authority to reduce words to such forms, as I have done; but I do it
only for this end, that it may be understood what this ordination of
words is, and not to have it received for true, till it be demonstrated
by good reason to be so.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER III.

                            OF PROPOSITION.

1. Divers kinds of speech.—2. Proposition defined.—3. Subject,
    predicate, and copula, what they are; and abstract and concrete
    what. 4. The use and abuse of names abstract.—5. Proposition,
    universal and particular.—6. Affirmative and negative.—7. True and
    false.—8. True and false belongs to speech, and not to things.—9.
    Proposition, primary, not primary, definition, axiom, petition.—10.
    Proposition, necessary and contingent.—11. Categorical and
    hypothetical.—12. The same proposition diversely pronounced.—13.
    Propositions that may be reduced to the same categorical
    proposition, are equipollent.—14. Universal propositions converted
    by contradictory names, are equipollent.—15. Negative propositions
    are the same, whether negation be before or after the copula.—16.
    Particular propositions simply converted, are equipollent.—17. What
    are subaltern, contrary, subcontrary, and contradictory
    propositions.—18. Consequence, what it is.—19. Falsity cannot follow
    from truth.—20. How one proposition is the cause of another.


[Sidenote: Divers kinds of speech.]

1. From the connexion or contexture of names arise divers kinds of
speech, whereof some signify the desires and affections of men; such
are, first, _interrogations_, which denote the desire of knowing: as,
_Who is a good man?_ In which speech there is one name expressed, and
another desired and expected from him of whom we ask the same. Then
_prayers_, which signify the desire of having something; _promises_,
_threats_, _wishes_, _commands_, _complaints_, and other significations
of other affections. Speech may also be absurd and insignificant; as
when there is a succession of words, to which there can be no succession
of thoughts in mind to answer them; and this happens often to such, as,
understanding nothing in some subtle matter, do, nevertheless, to make
others believe they understand, speak of the same incoherently; for the
connection of incoherent words, though it want the end of speech (which
is signification) yet it is speech; and is used by writers of
_metaphysics_ almost as frequently as speech significative. In
philosophy, there is but one kind of speech useful, which some call in
Latin _dictum_, others _enuntiatum et pronunciatum_; but most men call
it _proposition_, and is the speech of those that affirm or deny, and
expresseth truth or falsity.

[Sidenote: Proposition defined.]

2. _A_ PROPOSITION _is a speech consisting of two names copulated, by
which he that speaketh signifies he conceives the latter name to be the
name of the same thing whereof the former is the name; or_ (which is all
one) _that the former name is comprehended by the latter_. For example,
this speech, _man is a living creature_, in which two names are
copulated by the verb _is_, is a _proposition_, for this reason, that he
that speaks it conceives both _living creature_ and _man_ to be names of
the same thing, or that the former name, _man_, is comprehended by the
latter name, _living creature_. Now the former name is commonly called
the _subject_, or _antecedent_, or the _contained name_, and the latter
_predicate_, _consequent_, or _containing name_. The sign of connection
amongst most nations is either some word, as the word _is_ in the
proposition _man is a living creature_, or some case or termination of a
word, as in this proposition, _man walketh_ (which is equivalent to
this, _man is walking_); the termination by which it is said he
_walketh_, rather than he _is walking_, signifieth that those two are
understood to be copulated, or to be names of the same thing.

But there are, or certainly may be, some nations that have no word which
answers to our verb _is_, who nevertheless form propositions by the
position only of one name after another, as if instead of _man is a
living creature_, it should be said _man a living creature_; for the
very order of the names may sufficiently show their connection; and they
are as apt and useful in philosophy, as if they were copulated by the
verb _is_.

[Sidenote: Subject, predicate, and copula, what they are, and abstract
           and concrete what.]

3. Wherefore, in every proposition three things are to be considered,
_viz._ the two names, which are the _subject_, and the _predicate_, and
their _copulation_; both which names raise in our mind the thought of
one and the same thing; but the copulation makes us think of the cause
for which those names were imposed on that thing. As, for example, when
we say _a body is moveable_, though we conceive the same thing to be
designed by both those names, yet our mind rests not there, but searches
farther what it is _to be a body_, or _to be moveable_, that is, wherein
consists the difference betwixt these and other things, for which these
are so called, others are not so called. They, therefore, that seek what
it is _to be_ any thing, as _to be moveable_, _to be hot_, _&c._ seek in
things the causes of their names.

And from hence arises that distinction of names (touched in the last
chapter) into _concrete_ and _abstract_. For _concrete_ is the name of
any thing which we suppose to have a being, and is therefore called the
_subject_, in Latin _suppositum_, and in Greek ὑποκέιμενον; as _body_,
_moveable_, _moved_, _figurate_, _a cubit high_, _hot_, _cold_, _like_,
_equal_, _Appius_, _Lentulus_, and the like; and, _abstract_ is that
which in any subject denotes the cause of the concrete name, as _to be a
body_, _to be moveable_, _to be moved_, _to be figurate_, _to be of such
quantity_, _to be hot_, _to be cold_, _to be like_, _to be equal_, _to
be Appius_, _to be Lentulus_, _&c._ Or names equivalent to these, which
are most commonly called _abstract_ names, as _corporiety_, _mobility_,
_motion_, _figure_, _quantity_, _heat_, _cold_, _likeness_, _equality_,
and (as Cicero has it) _Appiety_ and _Lentulity_. Of the same kind also
are infinitives; for _to live_ and _to move_ are the same with _life_
and _motion_, or _to be living_ and _to be moved_. But _abstract names_
denote only the causes of _concrete names_, and not the things
themselves. For example, when we see any thing, or conceive in our mind
any visible thing, that thing appears to us, or is conceived by us, not
in one point, but as having parts distant from one another, that is, as
being extended and filling some space. Seeing therefore we call the
thing so conceived _body_, the cause of that name is, that that thing is
_extended_, or the _extension_ or _corporiety_ of it. So when we see a
thing appear sometimes here, sometimes there, and call it _moved_ or
_removed_, the cause of that name is that it _is moved_ or the _motion_
of the same.

And these causes of names are the same with the causes of our
conceptions, namely, some power of action, or affection of the thing
conceived, which some call the manner by which any thing works upon our
senses, but by most men they are called _accidents_; I say accidents,
not in that sense in which accident is opposed to necessary; but so, as
being neither the things themselves, nor parts thereof, do nevertheless
accompany the things in such manner, that (saving extension) they may
all perish, and be destroyed, but can never be abstracted.

[Sidenote: The use and abuse of names abstract.]

4. There is also this difference betwixt _concrete_ and _abstract_
names, that those were invented before propositions, but these after;
for these could have no being till there were propositions, from whose
_copula_ they proceed. Now in all matters that concern this life, but
chiefly in philosophy, there is both great use and great abuse of
_abstract names_; and the use consists in this, that without them we
cannot, for the most part, either reason, or compute the properties of
bodies; for when we would multiply, divide, add, or substract heat,
light, or motion, if we should double or add them together by concrete
names, saying (for example) hot is double to hot, light double to light,
or moved double to moved, we should not double the properties, but the
bodies themselves that are hot, light, moved, &c. which we would not do.
But the abuse proceeds from this, that some men seeing they can
consider, that is (as I said before) bring into account the increasings
and decreasings of quantity, heat and other accidents, without
considering their bodies or subjects (which they call _abstracting_, or
making to exist apart by themselves) they speak of accidents, as if they
might be separated from all bodies. And from hence proceed the gross
errors of writers of metaphysics; for, because they can consider thought
without the consideration of body, they infer there is no need of a
thinking-body; and because quantity may be considered without
considering body, they think also that quantity may be without body, and
body without quantity; and that a body has quantity by the addition of
quantity to it. From the same fountain spring those insignificant words,
_abstract substance_, _separated essence_, and the like; as also that
confusion of words derived from the Latin verb _est_, as _essence_,
_essentiality_, _entity_, _entitative_; besides _reality_,
_aliquiddity_, _quiddity_, _&c._ which could never have been heard of
among such nations as do not copulate their names by the verb _is_, but
by adjective verbs, as runneth, readeth, &c. or by the mere placing of
one name after another; and yet seeing such nations compute and reason,
it is evident that philosophy has no need of those words _essence_,
_entity_, and other the like barbarous terms.

[Sidenote: Proposition, universal and particular.]

5. There are many distinctions of propositions, whereof the first is,
that some are _universal_, others _particular_, others _indefinite_, and
others _singular_; and this is commonly called the distinction of
_quantity_. An _universal_ proposition is that whose subject is affected
with the sign of an universal name, as _every man is a living creature_.
_Particular_, that whose subject is affected with the sign of a
particular name, as _some man is learned_. An _indefinite_ proposition
has for its subject a common name, and put without any sign, as _man is
a living creature_, _man is learned_. And a _singular_ proposition is
that whose subject is a singular name, as _Socrates is a philosopher_,
_this man is black_.

[Sidenote: Affirmative and negative.]

6. The second distinction is into _affirmative_ and _negative_, and is
called the distinction of _quality_. An _affirmative_ proposition is
that whose predicate is a positive name, as _man is a living creature_.
_Negative_, that whose predicate is a negative name, as _man is not a
stone_.

[Sidenote: True & false.]

7. The third distinction is, that one is _true_, another _false_. A
_true_ proposition is that, whose predicate contains, or comprehends its
subject, or whose predicate is the name of every thing, of which the
subject is the name; as _man is a living creature_ is therefore a true
proposition, because whatsoever is called _man_, the same is also called
_living creature_; and _some man is sick_, is true, because _sick_ is
the name of _some man_. That which is not true, or that whose predicate
does not contain its subject, is called a _false_ proposition, as _man
is a stone_.

Now these words _true_, _truth_, and _true proposition_, are equivalent
to one another; for truth consists in speech, and not in the things
spoken of; and though _true_ be sometimes opposed to _apparent_ or
_feigned_, yet it is always to be referred to the truth of proposition;
for the image of a man in a glass, or a ghost, is therefore denied to be
a very man, because this proposition, _a ghost is a man_, is not true;
for it cannot be denied but that a ghost is a very ghost. And therefore
truth or verity is not any affection of the thing, but of the
proposition concerning it. As for that which the writers of metaphysics
say, that _a thing_, _one thing_, and _a very thing_, are equivalent to
one another, it is but trifling and childish; for who does not know,
that _a man_, _one man_, and _a very man_, signify the same.

[Sidenote: True & false belongs to speech, and not to things.]

8. And from hence it is evident, that truth and falsity have no place
but amongst such living creatures as use speech. For though some brute
creatures, looking upon the image of a man in a glass, may be affected
with it, as if it were the man himself, and for this reason fear it or
fawn upon it in vain; yet they do not apprehend it as true or false, but
only as like; and in this they are not deceived. Wherefore, as men owe
all their true ratiocination to the right understanding of speech; so
also they owe their errors to the misunderstanding of the same; and as
all the ornaments of philosophy proceed only from man, so from man also
is derived the ugly absurdity of false opinions. For speech has
something in it like to a spider's web, (as it was said of old of
_Solon's_ laws) for by contexture of words tender and delicate wits are
ensnared and stopped; but strong wits break easily through them.

From hence also this may be deduced, that the first truths were
arbitrarily made by those that first of all imposed names upon things,
or received them from the imposition of others. For it is true (for
example) that _man is a living creature_, but it is for this reason,
that it pleased men to impose both those names on the same thing.

[Sidenote: Proposition, primary, not primary, definition, axiom,
           petition.]

9. Fourthly, propositions are distinguished into _primary_ and _not
primary_. _Primary_ is that wherein the subject is explicated by a
predicate of many names, as _man is a body_, _animated_, _rational_; for
that which is comprehended in the name _man_, is more largely expressed
in the names _body_, _animated_, and _rational_, joined together; and it
is called _primary_, because it is first in ratiocination; for nothing
can be proved, without understanding first the name of the thing in
question. Now _primary_ propositions are nothing but definitions, or
parts of definitions, and these only are the principles of
demonstration, being truths constituted arbitrarily by the inventors of
speech, and therefore not to be demonstrated. To these propositions,
some have added others, which they call _primary_ and _principles_,
namely, _axioms_, and _common notions_; which, (though they be so
evident that they need no proof) yet, because they may be proved, are
not truly principles; and the less to be received for such, in regard
propositions not intelligible, and sometimes manifestly false, are
thrust on us under the name of _principles_ by the clamour of men, who
obtrude for evident to others, all that they themselves think true. Also
certain petitions are commonly received into the number of principles;
as, for example, _that a straight line may be drawn between two points_,
and other petitions of the writers of geometry; and these are indeed the
principles of art or construction, but not of science and demonstration.

[Sidenote: Proposition necessary & contingent.]

10. Fifthly, propositions are distinguished into _necessary_, that is,
necessarily true; and true, but not necessarily, which they call
_contingent_. A _necessary_ proposition is when nothing can at any time
be conceived or feigned, whereof the subject is the name, but the
predicate also is the name of the same thing; as _man is a living
creature_ is a necessary proposition, because at what time soever we
suppose the name _man_ agrees with any thing, at that time the name
_living-creature_ also agrees with the same. But a _contingent_
proposition is that, which at one time may be true, at another time
false; as _every crow is black_; which may perhaps be true now, but
false hereafter. Again, in every _necessary_ proposition, the predicate
is either equivalent to the subject, as in this, _man is a rational
living creature_; or part of an equivalent name, as in this, _man is a
living creature_, for the name _rational-living-creature_, or _man_, is
compounded of these two, _rational_ and _living-creature_. But in a
_contingent_ proposition this cannot be; for though this were true,
_every man is a liar_, yet because the word _liar_ is no part of a
compounded name equivalent to the name _man_, that proposition is not to
be called _necessary_, but _contingent_, though it should happen to be
true always. And therefore those propositions only are _necessary_,
which are of sempiternal truth, that is, true at all times. From hence
also it is manifest, that truth adheres not to things, but to speech
only, for some truths are eternal; for it will be eternally true, _if
man, then living-creature_; but that any _man_, or _living-creature_,
should exist eternally, is not necessary.

[Sidenote: Categorical & hypothetical.]

11. A sixth distinction of propositions is into _categorical_ and
_hypothetical_. A _categorical_ proposition is that which is simply or
absolutely pronounced, as _every man is a living-creature_, _no man is a
tree_; and _hypothetical_ is that which is pronounced conditionally, as,
_if any thing be a man, the same is also a living-creature_, _if
anything be a man, the same is also not-a-stone_.

A _categorical_ proposition, and an _hypothetical_ answering it, do both
signify the same, if the propositions be necessary; but not if they be
contingent. For example, if this, _every man is a living-creature_, be
true, this also will be true, _if any thing be a man, the same is also a
living-creature_; but in contingent propositions, though this be true,
_every crow is black_, yet this, _if any thing be a crow, the same is
black_, is false. But an _hypothetical_ proposition is then rightly said
to be true, when the consequence is true, as _every man is a
living-creature_, is rightly said to be a true proposition, because of
whatsoever it is truly said _that is a man_, it cannot but be truly said
also, _the same is a living creature_. And therefore whensoever an
_hypothetical_ proposition is true, the _categorical_ answering it, is
not only true, but also necessary; which I thought worth the noting, as
an argument, that philosophers may in most things reason more solidly by
_hypothetical_ than _categorical_ propositions.

[Sidenote: The same proposition diversely pronounced.]

12. But seeing every proposition may be, and uses to be, pronounced and
written in many forms, and we are obliged to speak in the same manner as
most men speak, yet they that learn philosophy from masters, had need to
take heed they be not deceived by the variety of expressions. And
therefore, whensoever they meet with any obscure proposition, they ought
to reduce it to its most simple and categorical form; in which the
copulative word _is_ must be expressed by itself, and not mingled in any
manner either with the subject or predicate, both which must be
separated and clearly distinguished one from another. For example, if
this proposition, _man can not sin_, be compared with this, _man cannot
sin_, their difference will easily appear if they be reduced to these,
_man is able not to sin_, and, _man is not able to sin_, where the
predicates are manifestly different. But they ought to do this silently
by themselves, or betwixt them and their masters only; for it will be
thought both ridiculous and absurd, for a man to use such language
publicly. Being therefore to speak of _equipollent_ propositions, I put
in the first place all those for _equipollent_, that may be reduced
purely to one and the same categorical proposition.

[Sidenote: Propositions that may be reduced to the same categorical
           proposition, are equipollent.]

13. Secondly, that which is categorical and necessary, is _equipollent_
to its hypothetical proposition; as this categorical, _a right-lined
triangle has its three angles equal to two right angles_, to this
hypothetical, _if any figure be a right-lined triangle, the three angles
of it are equal to two right angles_.

[Sidenote: Universal propositions converted by contradictory names, are
           equipollent.]

14. Also, any two universal propositions, of which the terms of the one
(that is, the subject and predicate) are to the terms of the other, and
their order inverted, as these, _every man is a living creature_, and
_every thing that is not a living-creature is not a man_, are
_equipollent_. For seeing _every man is a living creature_ is a true
proposition, the name _living creature_ contains the name _man_; but
they are both positive names, and therefore (by the last article of the
precedent chapter) the negative name _not man_, contains the negative
name _not living-creature_; wherefore _every thing that is not a
living-creature, is not a man_, is a true proposition. Likewise these,
_no man is a tree_, _no tree is a man_, are _equipollent_. For if it be
true that _tree_ is not the name of any _man_, then no one thing can be
signified by the two names _man_ and _tree_, wherefore _no tree is a
man_ is a true proposition. Also to this, _whatsoever is not a
living-creature is not a man_, where both the terms are negative, this
other proposition is equipollent, _only a living creature is a man_.

[Sidenote: Negative propositions are the same, whether the negation be
           before or after the copula.]

15. Fourthly, negative propositions, whether the particle of negation be
set after the copula as some nations do, or before it, as it is in Latin
and Greek, if the terms be the same, are equipollent: as, for example,
_man is not a tree_, and, _man is not-a-tree_, are equipollent, though
Aristotle deny it. Also these, _every man is not a tree_, and _no man is
a tree_, are equipollent, and that so manifestly, as it needs not be
demonstrated.

[Sidenote: Particular propositions simply converted, are equipollent.]

16. Lastly, all particular propositions that have their terms inverted,
as these, _some man is blind, some blind thing is a man_, are
equipollent; for either of the two names, is the name of some one and
the same man; and therefore in which soever of the two orders they be
connected, they signify the same truth.

[Sidenote: What are subaltern, contrary, subcontrary, and contradictory
           propositions.]

17. Of propositions that have the same terms, and are placed in the same
order, but varied either by quantity or quality, some are called
_subaltern_, others _contrary_, others _subcontrary_, and others
_contradictory_.

_Subaltern_, are universal and particular propositions of the same
quality; as, _every man is a living creature_, _some man is a living
creature_; or, _no man is wise_, _some man is not wise_. Of these, if
the universal be true, the particular will be true also.

_Contrary_, are universal propositions of different quality; as, _every
man is happy_, _no man is happy_. And of these, if one be true, the
other is false: also, they may both be false, as in the example given.

_Subcontrary_, are particular propositions of different quality; as,
_some man is learned_, _some man is not learned_; which cannot be both
false, but they may be both true.

_Contradictory_ are those that differ both in quantity and quality; as,
_every man is a living creature_, _some man is not a living-creature_;
which can neither be both true, nor both false.

[Sidenote: Consequence, what it is.]

18. A proposition is said to _follow_ from two other propositions, when
these being granted to be true, it cannot be denied but the other is
true also. For example, let these two propositions, _every man is a
living creature_, and, _every living creature is a body_, be supposed
true, that is, that _body_ is the name of _every living creature_, and
_living creature_ the name of _every man_. Seeing therefore, if these be
understood to be true, it cannot be understood that _body_ is not the
name of _every man_, that is, that _every man is a body_ is false, this
proposition will be said to _follow_ from those two, or to be
necessarily _inferred_ from them.

[Sidenote: Falsity cannot follow from truth.]

19. That a true proposition may follow from false propositions, may
happen sometimes; but false from true, never. For if these, _every man
is a stone_, and _every stone is a living creature_, (which are both
false) be granted to be true, it is granted also that _living creature_
is the name of _every stone_, and _stone_ of _every man_, that is, that
_living creature_ is the name of _every man_; that is to say, this
proposition _every man is a living creature_, is true, as it is indeed
true. Wherefore a true proposition may sometimes follow from false. But
if any two propositions be true, a false one can never follow from them.
For if true follow from false, for this reason only, that the false are
granted to be true, then truth from two truths granted will follow in
the same manner.

[Sidenote: How one proposition is the cause of another.]

20. Now, seeing none but a true proposition will follow from true, and
that the understanding of two propositions to be true, is the cause of
understanding that also to be true which is deduced from them; the two
antecedent propositions are commonly called the causes of the inferred
proposition, or conclusion. And from hence it is that logicians say, the
_premises_ are causes of the _conclusion_; which may pass, though it be
not properly spoken; for though understanding be the cause of
understanding, yet speech is not the cause of speech. But when they say,
the cause of the properties of any thing, is the thing itself, they
speak absurdly. For example, if a figure be propounded which is
triangular; seeing every triangle has all its angles together equal to
two right angles, from whence it follows that all the angles of that
figure are equal to two right angles, they say, for this reason, that
that figure is the cause of that equality. But seeing the figure does
not itself make its angles, and therefore cannot be said to be the
_efficient-cause_, they call it the _formal-cause_; whereas indeed it is
no cause at all; nor does the property of any figure follow the figure,
but has its being at the same time with it; only the knowledge of the
figure goes before the knowledge of the properties; and one knowledge is
truly the cause of another knowledge, namely the _efficient cause_.

And thus much concerning _proposition_; which in the progress of
philosophy is the first step, like the moving towards of one foot. By
the due addition of another step I shall proceed to _syllogism_, and
make a complete pace. Of which in the next chapter.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER IV.

                             OF SYLLOGISM.

1. The definition of syllogism.—2. In a syllogism there are but three
    terms.—3. Major, minor, and middle term; also major and minor
    proposition, what they are.—4. The middle term in every syllogism
    ought to be determined in both the propositions to one and the same
    thing.—5. From two particular propositions nothing can be
    concluded.—6. A syllogism is the collection of two propositions into
    one sum.—7. The figure of a syllogism, what it is.—8. What is in the
    mind answering to a syllogism.—9. The first indirect figure, how it
    is made.—10. The second indirect figure, how made.—11. How the third
    indirect figure is made.—12. There are many moods in every figure,
    but most of them useless in philosophy.—13. An hypothetical
    syllogism when equipollent to a categorical.


[Sidenote: Definition of syllogism.]

1. A SPEECH, consisting of three propositions, from two of which the
third follows, is called a SYLLOGISM; and that which follows is called
the _conclusion_; the other two _premises_. For example, this speech,
_every man is a living creature_, _every living creature is a body_,
therefore, _every man is a body_, is a _syllogism_, because the third
proposition follows from the two first; that is, if those be granted to
be true, this must also be granted to be true.

[Sidenote: In a syllogism there are but three terms.]

2. From two propositions which have not one term common, no conclusion
can follow; and therefore no _syllogism_ can be made of them. For let
any two premises, _a man is a living creature_, _a tree is a plant_, be
both of them true, yet because it cannot be collected from them that
_plant_ is the name of a _man_, or _man_ the name of a _plant_, it is
not necessary that this conclusion, _a man is a plant_, should be true.
Corollary: therefore, in the _premises_ of a _syllogism_ there can be
but three _terms_.

Besides, there can be no term in the _conclusion_, which was not in the
_premises_. For let any two premises be, _a man is a living creature_,
_a living creature is a body_, yet if any other term be put in the
conclusion, as _man is two-footed_; though it be true, it cannot follow
from the premises, because from them it cannot be collected, that the
name _two-footed_ belongs to a _man_; and therefore, again, in every
_syllogism_ there can be but three _terms_.

[Sidenote: Major, minor and middle term; also major and minor
           proposition, what they are.]

3. Of these terms, that which is the _predicate_ in the conclusion, is
commonly called the _major_; that which is the _subject_ in the
conclusion, the _minor_, and the other is the _middle term_; as in this
syllogism, _a man is a living creature_, _a living creature is a body_,
therefore, _a man is a body_, _body_ is the _major_, _man_ the _minor_,
and _living creature_ the _middle term_. Also of the premises, that in
which the _major term_ is found, is called the _major proposition_, and
that which has the _minor term_, the _minor proposition_.

[Sidenote: The middle term in every syllogism to be determined in both
           propositions to one and the same thing.]

4. If the middle term be not in both the premises determined to one and
the same singular thing, no conclusion will follow, nor syllogism be
made. For let the minor term be _man_, the middle term _living
creature_, and the major term _lion_; and let the premises be, _man is a
living creature_, _some living creature is a lion_, yet it will not
follow that _every_ or _any man is a lion_. By which it is manifest,
that in every syllogism, that proposition which has the middle term for
its _subject_, ought to be either _universal_ or _singular_, but not
_particular_ nor _indefinite_. For example, this syllogism, _every man
is a living creature_, _some living creature is four-footed_, therefore
_some man is four-footed_, is therefore faulty, because the middle term,
_living creature_, is in the first of the premises determined only to
_man_, for there the name of _living creature_ is given to man only, but
in the latter premise it may be understood of some other living creature
besides man. But if the latter premise had been _universal_, as here,
_every man is a living creature_, _every living creature is a body_,
therefore _every man is a body_, the syllogism had been true; for it
would have followed that _body_ had been the name of _every living
creature_, that is of _man_; that is to say, the conclusion _every man
is a body_ had been true. Likewise, when the middle term is a _singular_
name, a syllogism may be made, I say a true syllogism, though useless in
philosophy, as this, _some man is Socrates_, _Socrates is a
philosopher_, therefore, _some man is a philosopher_; for the premises
being granted, the conclusion cannot be denied.

[Sidenote: From two particular propositions nothing can be concluded.]

5. And therefore of two premises, in both which the middle term is
particular, a syllogism cannot be made; for whether the middle term be
the _subject_ in both the premises, or the _predicate_ in both, or the
_subject_ in one, and the _predicate_ in the other, it will not be
necessarily determined to the same thing. For let the premises be,

    _Some man is blind_,            In both which the middle
    _Some man is learned_,         } term is the _subject_,

it will not follow that _blind_ is the name of any _learned man_, or
_learned_ the name of any _blind man_, seeing the name _learned_ does
not contain the name _blind_, nor this that; and therefore it is not
necessary that both should be names of the same man. So from these
premises,

 _Every man is a living-creature_,   } In both which the middle
 _Every horse is a living-creature_, } term is the _predicate_,

nothing will follow. For seeing _living creature_ is in both of them
_indefinite_, which is equivalent to _particular_, and that _man_ may be
one kind of _living creature_, and _horse_ another kind, it is not
necessary that _man_ should be the name of _horse_, or _horse_ of _man_.
Or if the premises be,

  _Every man is a                  In one of which the
  living-creature_,                   } middle-term
  _Some living creature is
  four-footed_,

                                      } is the _subject_, and in the

                                      } other the _predicate_,

the conclusion will not follow, because the name _living creature_ being
not determined, it may in one of them be understood of _man_, in the
other of _not-man_.

[Sidenote: A syllogism is the collection of two propositions into one
           sum.]

6. Now it is manifest from what has been said, that a syllogism is
nothing but a collection of the sum of two propositions, joined together
by a common term, which is called the _middle term_. And as proposition
is the addition of two names, so syllogism is the adding together of
three.

[Sidenote: The figure of a syllogism what it is.]

7. Syllogisms are usually distinguished according to their diversity of
_figures_, that is, by the diverse position of the middle term. And
again in figure there is a distinction of certain _moods_, which consist
of the differences of propositions in _quantity_ and _quality_. The
first figure is that, in which the terms are placed one after another
according to their latitude of signification; in which order the _minor
term_ is first, the _middle term_ next, and the _major_ last; as, if the
minor term be _man_, the middle term, _living creature_, and the major
term, _body_, then, _man is a living-creature, is a body_, will be a
syllogism in the first figure: in which, _man is a living creature_ is
the minor proposition; the major, _living creature is a body_, and the
conclusion, or sum of both, _man is a body_. Now this figure is called
_direct_, because the terms stand in direct order; and it is varied by
_quantity_ and _quality_ into four _moods_: of which the first is that
wherein all the terms are _positive_, and the minor term _universal_, as
_every man is a living creature_, _every living creature is a body_: in
which all the propositions are affirmative, and universal. But if the
major term be a negative name, and the minor an universal name, the
_figure_ will be in the second _mood_, as, _every man is a living
creature_, _every living creature is not a tree_, in which the major
proposition and conclusion are both universal and negative. To these
two, are commonly added two more, by making the minor term particular.
Also it may happen that both the major and middle terms are negative
terms, and then there arises another _mood_, in which all the
propositions are negative, and yet the syllogism will be good; as, if
the minor term be _man_, the middle term _not a stone_, and the major
term _not a flint_, this syllogism, _no man is a stone_, _whatsoever is
not a stone is not a flint_, therefore, _no man is a flint_, is true,
though it consist of three negatives. But in philosophy, the profession
whereof is to establish universal rules concerning the properties of
things, seeing the difference betwixt negatives and affirmatives is only
this, that in the former the subject is affirmed by a negative name, and
by a positive in the latter, it is superfluous to consider any other
_mood_ in direct _figure_, besides that, in which all the propositions
are both universal and affirmative.

[Sidenote: What is in the mind answering to a syllogism.]

8. The thoughts in the mind answering to a direct syllogism, proceed in
this manner; first, there is conceived a phantasm of the thing named,
with that accident or quality thereof, for which it is in the minor
proposition called by that name which is the subject; next, the mind has
a phantasm of the same thing with that accident, or quality, for which
it hath the name, that in the same proposition is the predicate;
thirdly, the thought returns of the same thing as having that accident
in it, for which it is called by the name, that is the predicate of the
major proposition; and lastly, remembering that all those are the
accidents of one and the same thing, it concludes that those three names
are also names of one and the same thing; that is to say, the conclusion
is true. For example, when this syllogism is made, _man is a living
creature_, _a living creature is a body_, therefore, _man is a body_,
the mind conceives first an image of a man speaking or discoursing, and
remembers that that, which so appears, is called _man_; then it has the
image of the same man moving, and remembers that that, which appears so,
is called _living creature_; thirdly, it conceives an image of the same
man, as filling some place or space, and remembers that what appears so
is called _body_; and lastly, when it remembers that that thing, which
was extended, and moved and spake, was one and the same thing, it
concludes that the three names, _man_, _living creature_, and _body_,
are names of the same thing, and that therefore _man is a living
creature_ is a true proposition. From whence it is manifest, that living
creatures that have not the use of speech, have no conception or thought
in the mind, answering to a syllogism made of universal propositions;
seeing it is necessary to think not only of the thing, but also by turns
to remember the divers names, which for divers considerations thereof
are applied to the same.

[Sidenote: The first indirect figure how made.]

9. The rest of the figures arise either from the inflexion, or inversion
of the first or direct figure; which is done by changing the major, or
minor, or both the propositions, into converted propositions equipollent
to them.

From whence follow three other figures; of which, two are _inflected_,
and the third _inverted_. The first of these three is made by the
conversion of the major proposition. For let the minor, middle, and
major terms stand in direct order, thus, _man is a living creature_, _is
not a stone_, which is the first or direct figure; the inflection will
be by converting the major proposition in this manner, _man is a living
creature_, _a stone is not a living creature_; and this is the second
figure, or the first of the indirect figures; in which the conclusion
will be, _man is not a stone_. For (having shown in the last chapter,
art. 14, that universal propositions, converted by contradiction of the
terms, are equipollent) both those syllogisms conclude alike; so that if
the major be read (like Hebrew) backwards, thus, _a living creature is
not a stone_, it will be direct again, as it was before. In like manner
this direct syllogism, _man is not a tree_, _is not a pear-tree_, will
be made indirect by converting the major proposition (by contradiction
of the terms) into another equipollent to it, thus, _man is not a tree_,
_a pear-tree is a tree_; for the same conclusion will follow, _man is
not a pear-tree_.

But for the conversion of the direct figure into the first indirect
figure, the major term in the direct figure ought to be negative. For
though this direct, _man is a living creature_, _is a body_, be made
indirect, by converting the major proposition, thus,

                 _Man is a living creature_,
                 _Not a body is not a living creature_,
                 Therefore, _Every man is a body_;

Yet this conversion appears so obscure, that this mood is of no use at
all. By the conversion of the major proposition, it is manifest, that in
this figure, the middle term is always the predicate in both the
premises.

[Sidenote: Second indirect figure how made.]

10. The second indirect figure is made by converting the minor
proposition, so as that the middle term is the subject in both. But this
never concludes universally, and therefore is of no use in philosophy.
Nevertheless I will set down an example of it; by which this direct

                   _Every man is a living creature_,
                   _Every living creature is a body_,

by conversion of the minor proposition, will stand thus,

                   _Some living creature is a man_,
                   _Every living creature is a body_,
                   Therefore, _Some man is a body_.

For _every man is a living creature_ cannot be converted into this,
_every living creature is a man_: and therefore if this syllogism be
restored to its direct form, the minor proposition will be _some man is
a living creature_, and consequently the conclusion will be _some man is
a body_, seeing the minor term _man_, which is the subject in the
conclusion, is a particular name.

[Sidenote: How the third indirect figure is made.]

11. The third indirect or inverted figure, is made by the conversion of
both the premises. For example, this direct syllogism,

                _Every man is a living creature_,
                _Every living creature is not a stone_,
                Therefore, _Every man is not a stone_,

being inverted, will stand thus,

          _Every stone is not a living creature_,
          _Whatsoever is not a living creature, is not a man_,
          Therefore, _Every stone is not a man_;

which conclusion is the converse of the direct conclusion, and
equipollent to the same.

The figures, therefore, of syllogisms, if they be numbered by the
diverse situation of the middle term only, are but three; in the first
whereof, the middle term has the middle place; in the second, the last;
and in the third, the first place. But if they be numbered according to
the situation of the terms simply, they are four; for the first may be
distinguished again into two, namely, into direct and inverted. From
whence it is evident, that the controversy among logicians concerning
the fourth figure, is a mere λογόμαχια, or contention about the name
thereof; for, as for the thing itself, it is plain that the situation of
the terms (not considering the quantity or quality by which the moods
are distinguished) makes four differences of syllogisms, which may be
called figures, or have any other name at pleasure.

[Sidenote: There are many moods in every figure, but most of them
           useless in philosophy.]

12. In every one of these figures there are many moods, which are made
by varying the premises according to all the differences they are
capable of, by quantity and quality; as namely, in the direct figure
there are six moods; in the first indirect figure, four; in the second,
fourteen; and in the third, eighteen. But because from the direct figure
I rejected as superfluous all moods besides that which consists of
universal propositions, and whose minor proposition is affirmative, I
do, together with it, reject the moods of the rest of the figures which
are made by conversion of the premises in the direct figure.

[Sidenote: An hypothetical syllogism when equipollent to a categorical.]

13. As it was showed before, that in necessary propositions a
categorical and hypothetical proposition are equipollent; so likewise it
is manifest that a categorical and hypothetical syllogism are
equivalent. For every categorical syllogism, as this,

                   _Every man is a living creature_,
                   _Every living creature is a body_,
                   Therefore, _Every man is a body_,

is of equal force with this hypothetical syllogism:

      _If any thing be a man, the same is also a living creature_,
      _If any thing be a living creature, the same is a body_,
      Therefore, _If any thing be a man, the same is a body_.

In like manner, this categorical syllogism in an indirect figure,

                   _No stone is a living creature_,
                   _Every man is a living creature_,
                   Therefore, _No man is a stone_,
                   Or, _No stone is a man_,

is equivalent to this hypothetical syllogism:

     _If any thing be a man, the same is a living creature_,
     _If any thing be a stone, the same is not a living creature_,
     Therefore, _If any thing be a stone, the same is not a man_,
     Or, _If any thing be a man, the same is not a stone_.

And thus much seems sufficient for the nature of syllogisms; (for the
doctrine of moods and figures is clearly delivered by others that have
written largely and profitably of the same). Nor are precepts so
necessary as practice for the attaining of true ratiocination; and they
that study the demonstrations of mathematicians, will sooner learn true
logic, than they that spend time in reading the rules of syllogizing
which logicians have made; no otherwise than little children learn to
go, not by precepts, but by exercising their feet. This, therefore, may
serve for the first pace in the way to Philosophy.

In the next place I shall speak of the faults and errors into which men
that reason unwarily are apt to fall; and of their kinds and causes.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER V.

                   OF ERRING, FALSITY, AND CAPTIONS.

1. Erring and falsity how they differ. Error of the mind by itself
    without the use of words, how it happens.—2. A sevenfold incoherency
    of names, every one of which makes always a false proposition.—3.
    Examples of the first manner of incoherency.—4. Of the second.—5. Of
    the third.—6. Of the fourth.—7. Of the fifth.—8. Of the sixth.—9. Of
    the seventh.—10. Falsity of propositions detected by resolving the
    terms with definitions continued till they come to simple names, or
    names that are the most general of their kind.—11. Of the fault of a
    syllogism consisting in the implication of the terms with the
    copula.—12. Of the fault which consists in equivocation.—13.
    Sophistical captions are oftener faulty in the matter than in the
    form of syllogisms.


[Sidenote: Erring & falsity how they differ. Error of the mind by
           itself, without the use of words, how it happens.]

1. Men are subject to _err_ not only in affirming and denying, but also
in perception, and in silent cogitation. In affirming and denying, when
they call any thing by a name, which is not the name thereof; as if from
seeing the sun first by reflection in water, and afterwards again
directly in the firmament, we should to both those appearances give the
name of sun, and say there are two suns; which none but men can do, for
no other living creatures have the use of names. This kind of error only
deserves the name of _falsity_, as arising, not from sense, nor from the
things themselves, but from pronouncing rashly; for names have their
constitution, not from the species of things, but from the will and
consent of men. And hence it comes to pass, that men pronounce
_falsely_, by their own negligence, in departing from such appellations
of things as are agreed upon, and are not deceived neither by the
things, nor by the sense; for they do not perceive that the thing they
see is called sun, but they give it that name from their own will and
agreement. Tacit errors, or the errors of sense and cogitation, are
made, by passing from one imagination to the imagination of another
different thing; or by feigning that to be past, or future, which never
was, nor ever shall be; as when, by seeing the image of the sun in
water, we imagine the sun itself to be there; or by seeing swords, that
there has been or shall be fighting, because it uses to be so for the
most part; or when from promises we feign the mind of the promiser to be
such and such; or lastly, when from any sign we vainly imagine something
to be signified, which is not. And errors of this sort are common to all
things that have sense; and yet the deception proceeds neither from our
senses, nor from the things we perceive; but from ourselves while we
feign such things as are but mere images to be something more than
images. But neither things, nor imaginations of things, can be said to
be false, seeing they are truly what they are; nor do they, as signs,
promise any thing which they do not perform; for they indeed do not
promise at all, but we from them; nor do the clouds, but we, from seeing
the clouds, say it shall rain. The best way, therefore, to free
ourselves from such errors as arise from natural signs, is first of all,
before we begin to reason concerning such conjectural things, to suppose
ourselves ignorant, and then to make use of our ratiocination; for these
errors proceed from the want of ratiocination; whereas, errors which
consist in affirmation and negation, (that is, the falsity of
propositions) proceed only from reasoning amiss. Of these, therefore, as
repugnant to philosophy, I will speak principally.

[Sidenote: A sevenfold incoherency of names, all of which make always a
           false proposition.]

2. Errors which happen in reasoning, that is, in syllogizing, consist
either in the falsity of the premises, or of the inference. In the first
of these cases, a syllogism is said to be faulty in the _matter_ of it;
and in the second case, in the _form_. I will first consider the matter,
namely, how many ways a proposition may be false; and next the form, and
how it comes to pass, that when the premises are true, the inference is,
notwithstanding, false.

Seeing, therefore, that proposition only is true, (chap, III, art. 7) in
which are copulated two names of one and the same thing; and that always
false, in which names of different things are copulated, look how many
ways names of different things may be copulated, and so many ways a
false proposition may be made.

Now, all things to which we give names, may be reduced to these four
kinds, namely, _bodies_, _accidents_, _phantasms_, and _names_
themselves; and therefore, in every true proposition, it is necessary
that the names copulated, be both of them names of _bodies_, or both
names of _accidents_, or both names of _phantasms_, or both names of
_names_. For names otherwise copulated are incoherent, and constitute a
false proposition. It may happen, also, that the name of a _body_, of an
_accident_, or of a _phantasm_, may be copulated with the name of a
_speech_. So that copulated names may be incoherent seven manner of
ways.

 1. If the name of a Body       }            { the name of an Accident.
 2. If the name of a Body       }            { the name of a Phantasm.
 3. If the name of a Body       }     be     { the name of a Name.
 4. If the name of an Accident  } copulated  { the name of a Phantasm.
 5. If the name of an Accident  }    with    { the name of a Name.
 6. If the name of a Phantasm   }            { the name of a Name.
 7. If the name of a Body,      }            { the name of a Speech.
    Accident, or Phantasm       }            {

Of all which I will give some examples.

[Sidenote: Examples of the first manner of incoherency.]

3. After the first of these ways propositions are false, when abstract
names are copulated with concrete names; as (in Latin and Greek) _esse
est ens_, _essentia est ens_, τὸ τί ἦν ειναὶ (_i._); _quidditas est
ens_, and many the like, which are found in Aristotle's _Metaphysics_.
Also, the _understanding worketh_, the _understanding understandeth_,
the _sight seeth_; a _body_ is _magnitude_, a _body_ is _quantity_, a
_body_ is _extension_; to _be a man_ is a _man_, _whiteness_ is a _white
thing_, &c.; which is as if one should say, the _runner_ is the
_running_, or the _walk walketh_. Moreover, _essence_ is _separated_,
_substance_ is _abstracted_: and others like these, or derived from
these, (with which common philosophy abounds.) For seeing no _subject_
of an _accident_ (that is, no _body_) is an _accident_: no name of an
_accident_ ought to be given to a _body_, nor of a _body_ to an
_accident_.

[Sidenote: The second.]

4. False, in the second manner, are such propositions as these; a _ghost
is a body_, or a _spirit_, that is, a thin body; _sensible species fly
up and down in the air_, or _are moved hither and thither_, which is
proper to bodies; also, a _shadow is moved_, or _is a body_; _light is
moved_, or _is a body_; _colour is the object of sight_, _sound of
hearing_; _space_ or _place is extended_; and innumerable others of this
kind. For seeing ghosts, sensible species, a shadow, light, colour,
sound, space, &c. appear to us no less sleeping than waking, they cannot
be things without us, but only phantasms of the mind that imagines them;
and therefore the names of these, copulated with the names of bodies,
cannot constitute a true proposition.

[Sidenote: The third.]

5. False propositions of the third kind, are such as these; _genus est
ens_, _universale est ens_, _ens de ente prædicatur_. For _genus_, and
_universale_, and _predicare_, are names of names, and not of things.
Also, _number is infinite_, is a false proposition; for no number can be
infinite, but only the word _number_ is then called an indefinite name
when there is no determined number answering to it in the mind.

[Sidenote: The fourth.]

6. To the fourth kind belong such false propositions as these, _an
object is of such magnitude or figure as appears to the beholders_;
_colour, light, sound, are in the object_; and the like. For the same
object appears sometimes greater, sometimes lesser, sometimes square,
sometimes round, according to the diversity of the distance and medium;
but the true magnitude and figure of the thing seen is always one and
the same; so that the magnitude and figure which appears, is not the
true magnitude and figure of the object, nor anything but phantasm; and
therefore, in such propositions as these, the names of accidents are
copulated with the names of phantasms.

[Sidenote: The fifth.]

7. Propositions are false in the fifth manner, when it is said that _the
definition is the essence of a thing_; _whiteness_, or some other
accident, _is the genus, or universal_. For definition is not the
essence of any thing, but a speech signifying what we conceive of the
essence thereof; and so also not whiteness itself, but the word
whiteness, is a genus, or an universal name.

[Sidenote: The sixth.]

8. In the sixth manner they err, that say the _idea of anything is
universal_; as if there could be in the mind an image of a man, which
were not the image of some one man, but a man simply, which is
impossible; for every idea is one, and of one thing; but they are
deceived in this, that they put the _name_ of the thing for the _idea_
thereof.

[Sidenote: The seventh.]

9. They err in the seventh manner, that make this distinction between
things that have being, that some of them _exist by themselves_, others
by _accident_; namely, because _Socrates is a man_ is a necessary
proposition, and _Socrates is a musician_ a contingent proposition,
therefore they say some things exist necessarily or by themselves,
others contingently or by accident; whereby, seeing _necessary_,
_contingent_, _by itself_, _by accident_, are not names of things, but
of propositions, they that say _any thing that has being, exists by
accident_, copulate the name of a proposition with the name of a thing.
In the same manner also, they err, which place some ideas in the
understanding, others in the fancy; as if from the understanding of this
proposition, _man is a living creature_, we had one idea or image of a
man derived from sense to the memory, and another to the understanding;
wherein that which deceives them is this, that they think one idea
should be answerable to a name, another to a proposition, which is
false; for proposition signifies only the order of those things one
after another, which we observe in the same idea of man; so that this
proposition, _man is a living creature_ raises but one idea in us,
though in that idea we consider that first, for which he is called man,
and next that, for which he is called living creature. The falsities of
propositions in all these several manners, is to be discovered by the
definitions of the copulated names.

[Sidenote: Falsity of propositions detected by resolving the terms with
           definitions.]

10. But when names of bodies are copulated with names of bodies, names
of accidents with names of accidents, names of names with names of
names, and names of phantasms, with names of phantasms, if we,
nevertheless, remain still doubtful whether such propositions are true,
we ought then in the first place to find out the definition of both
those names, and again the definitions of such names as are in the
former definition, and so proceed by a continual resolution till we come
to a simple name, that is, to the most general or most universal name of
that kind; and if after all this, the truth or falsity thereof be not
evident, we must search it out by philosophy, and ratiocination,
beginning from definitions. For every proposition, universally true, is
either a definition, or part of a definition, or the evidence of it
depends upon definitions.

[Sidenote: Of the fault of a syllogism consisting in implication of the
           terms with the copula.]

11. That fault of a syllogism which lies hid in the form thereof, will
always be found either in the implication of the copula with one of the
terms, or in the equivocation of some word; and in either of these ways
there will be four terms, which (as I have shewn) cannot stand in a true
syllogism. Now the implication of the copula with either term, is easily
detected by reducing the propositions to plain and clear predication; as
(for example) if any man should argue thus,

               _The hand toucheth the pen_,
               _The pen toucheth the paper_,
               Therefore, _The hand toucheth the paper_;

the fallacy will easily appear by reducing it, thus:

             _The hand, is, touching the pen_,
             _The pen, is, touching the paper_,
             Therefore, _The hand, is, touching the paper_;

where there are manifestly these four terms, _the hand_, _touching the
pen_, _the pen_, and _touching the the paper_. But the danger of being
deceived by sophisms of this kind, does not seem to be so great, as that
I need insist longer upon them.

[Sidenote: Of the fault which consists in equivocation.]

12. And though there may be fallacy in equivocal terms, yet in those
that be manifestly such, there is none at all; nor in metaphors, for
they profess the transferring of names from one thing to another.
Nevertheless, sometimes equivocals (and those not very obscure) may
deceive; as in this argumentation:--_It belongs to metaphysics to treat
of principles; but the first principle of all, is, that the same thing
cannot both exist and not exist at the same time; and therefore it
belongs to metaphysics to treat whether the same thing may both exist
and not exist at the same time_; where the fallacy lies in the
equivocation of the word principle; for whereas Aristotle in the
beginning of his _Metaphysics_, says, that _the treating of principles
belongs to primary science_, he understands by principles, causes of
things, and certain existences which he calls primary; but where he says
_a primary proposition is a principle_, by principle, there, he means
the beginning and cause of knowledge, that is, the understanding of
words, which, if any man want, he is incapable of learning.

[Sidenote: Sophistical captions are oftener faulty in the matter than in
           the form of syllogisms.]

13. But the _captions_ of sophists and sceptics, by which they were
wont, of old, to deride and oppose truth, were faulty for the most part,
not in the form, but in the matter of syllogism; and they deceived not
others oftener than they were themselves deceived. For the force of that
famous argument of Zeno against motion, consisted in this proposition,
_whatsoever may be divided into parts, infinite in number, the same is
infinite_; which he, without doubt, thought to be true, yet nevertheless
is false. For to be divided into infinite parts, is nothing else but to
be divided into as many parts as any man will. But it is not necessary
that a line should have parts infinite in number, or be infinite,
because I can divide and subdivide it as often as I please; for how many
parts soever I make, yet their number is finite; but because he that
says parts, simply, without adding how many, does not limit any number,
but leaves it to the determination of the hearer, therefore we say
commonly, a line may be divided infinitely; which cannot be true in any
other sense.

[Sidenote: Conclusion.]

And thus much may suffice concerning syllogism, which is, as it were,
the first pace towards philosophy; in which I have said as much as is
necessary to teach any man from whence all true argumentation has its
force. And to enlarge this treatise with all that may be heaped
together, would be as superfluous, as if one should (as I said before)
give a young child precepts for the teaching of him to go; for the art
of reasoning is not so well learned by precepts as by practice, and by
the reading of those books in which the conclusions are all made by
severe demonstration. And so I pass on to the way of philosophy, that
is, to the method of study.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER VI.

                               OF METHOD.

1. Method and science defined.—2. It is more easily known concerning
    singular, than universal things, that they are; and contrarily, it
    is more easily known concerning universal, than singular things, why
    they are, or what are their causes.—3. What it is philosophers seek
    to know.—4. The first part, by which principles are found out, is
    purely analytical.—5. The highest causes, and most universal in
    every kind, are known by themselves.—6. Method from principles found
    out, tending to science simply, what it is.—7. That method of civil
    and natural science, which proceeds from sense to principles, is
    analytical; and again, that, which begins at principles, is
    synthetical.—8. The method of searching out, whether any thing
    propounded be matter or accident.—9. The method of seeking whether
    any accident be in this, or in that subject.—10. The method of
    searching after the cause of any effect propounded.—11. Words serve
    to invention, as marks; to demonstration, as signs.—12. The method
    of demonstration is synthetical.—13. Definitions only are primary
    and universal propositions.—14. The nature and definition of a
    definition.—15. The properties of a definition.—16. The nature of a
    demonstration.—17. The properties of a demonstration, and order of
    things to be demonstrated.—18. The faults of a demonstration.—19.
    Why the analytical method of geometricians cannot be treated of in
    this place.


[Sidenote: Method and science defined.]

1. For the understanding of _method_, it will be necessary for me to
repeat the definition of philosophy, delivered above (Chap. I, art. 2.)
in this manner, _Philosophy is the knowledge we acquire, by true
ratiocination, of appearances, or apparent effects, from the knowledge
we have of some possible production or generation of the same; and of
such production, as has been or may be, from the knowledge we have of
the effects_. METHOD, therefore, in the study of philosophy, _is the
shortest way of finding out effects by their known causes, or of causes
by their known effects_. But we are then said to know any effect, when
we know _that there be causes of the same_, and _in what subject those
causes are_, and _in what subject they produce that effect_, and _in
what manner they work the same_. And this is the science of causes, or,
as they call it, of the διότι. All other science, which is called the
ὄτι, is either perception by sense, or the imagination, or memory
remaining after such perception.

The first beginnings, therefore, of knowledge, are the phantasms of
sense and imagination; and that there be such phantasms we know well
enough by nature; but to know why they be, or from what causes they
proceed, is the work of ratiocination; which consists (as is said above,
in the 1st Chapter, Art. 2) in _composition_, and _division_ or
_resolution_. There is therefore no method, by which we find out the
causes of things, but is either _compositive_ or _resolutive_, or
_partly compositive_, and _partly resolutive_. And the resolutive is
commonly called _analytical_ method, as the compositive is called
_synthetical_.

[Sidenote: It is easier known concerning singular than universal things,
           that they are; and contrarily it is easier known concerning
           universal than singular things, why they are, or what are
           their causes.]

2. It is common to all sorts of method, to proceed from known things to
unknown; and this is manifest from the cited definition of philosophy.
But in knowledge by sense, the whole object is more known, than any part
thereof; as when we see a man, the conception or whole idea of that man
is first or more known, than the particular ideas of his being
_figurate_, _animate_, and _rational_; that is, we first see the whole
man, and take notice of his being, before we observe in him those other
particulars. And therefore in any knowledge of the ὅτι, or that any
thing _is_, the beginning of our search is from the whole idea; and
contrarily, in our knowledge of the διότι, or of the causes of any
thing, that is, in the sciences, we have more knowledge of the causes of
the parts than of the whole. For the cause of the whole is compounded of
the causes of the parts; but it is necessary that we know the things
that are to be compounded, before we can know the whole compound. Now,
by parts, I do not here mean parts of the thing itself, but parts of its
nature; as, by the parts of man, I do not understand his head, his
shoulders, his arms, &c. but his figure, quantity, motion, sense,
reason, and the like; which accidents being compounded or put together,
constitute the whole nature of man, but not the man himself. And this is
the meaning of that common saying, namely, that some things are more
known to us, others more known to nature; for I do not think that they,
which so distinguish, mean that something is known to nature, which is
known to no man; and therefore, by those things, that are more known to
us, we are to understand things we take notice of by our senses, and, by
more known to nature, those we acquire the knowledge of by reason; for
in this sense it is, that the _whole_, that is, those things that have
universal names, (which, for brevity's sake, I call _universal_) are
more known to us than the _parts_, that is, such things as have names
less universal, (which I therefore call _singular_); and the causes of
the parts are more known to nature than the cause of the whole; that is,
universals than singulars.

[Sidenote: What it is philosophers seek to know.]

3. In the study of philosophy, men search after science either simply or
indefinitely; that is, to know as much as they can, without propounding
to themselves any limited question; or they enquire into the cause of
some determined appearance, or endeavour to find out the certainty of
something in question, as what is the cause of _light_, of _heat_, of
_gravity_, of a _figure_ propounded, and the like; or in what _subject_
any propounded _accident_ is inherent; or what may conduce most to the
_generation_ of some propounded _effect_ from many _accidents_; or in
what manner particular causes ought to be compounded for the production
of some certain effect. Now, according to this variety of things in
question, sometimes the _analytical method_ is to be used, and sometimes
the _synthetical_.

[Sidenote: The first part, by which principles are discovered, is purely
           analytical.]

4. But to those that search after science indefinitely, which consists
in the knowledge of the causes of all things, as far forth as it may be
attained, (and the causes of singular things are compounded of the
causes of universal or simple things) it is necessary that they know the
causes of universal things, or of such accidents as are common to all
bodies, that is, to all matter, before they can know the causes of
singular things, that is, of those accidents by which one thing is
distinguished from another. And, again, they must know what those
universal things are, before they can know their causes. Moreover,
seeing universal things are contained in the nature of singular things,
the knowledge of them is to be acquired by reason, that is, by
resolution. For example, if there be propounded a conception or _idea_
of some singular thing, as of a _square_, this square is to be resolved
into a _plain, terminated with a certain number of equal and straight
lines and right angles_. For by this resolution we have these things
universal or agreeable to all matter, namely, _line_, _plain_, (which
contains _superficies_) _terminated_, _angle_, _straightness_,
_rectitude_, and _equality_; and if we can find out the causes of these,
we may compound them altogether into the cause of a square. Again, if
any man propound to himself the conception of _gold_, he may, by
resolving, come to the ideas of _solid_, _visible_, _heavy_, (that is,
tending to the centre of the earth, or downwards) and many other more
universal than gold itself; and these he may resolve again, till he come
to such things as are most universal. And in this manner, by resolving
continually, we may come to know what those things are, whose causes
being first known severally, and afterwards compounded, bring us to the
knowledge of singular things. I conclude, therefore, that the method of
attaining to the universal knowledge of things, is purely _analytical_.

[Sidenote: The highest causes, and most universal in every kind, are
           known by themselves.]

5. But the causes of universal things (of those, at least, that have any
cause) are manifest of themselves, or (as they say commonly) known to
nature; so that they need no method at all; for they have all but one
universal cause, which is motion. For the variety of all figures arises
out of the variety of those motions by which they are made; and motion
cannot be understood to have any other cause besides motion; nor has the
variety of those things we perceive by sense, as of _colours_, _sounds_,
_savours_, &c. any other cause than motion, residing partly in the
objects that work upon our senses, and partly in ourselves, in such
manner, as that it is manifestly some kind of motion, though we cannot,
without ratiocination, come to know what kind. For though many cannot
understand till it be in some sort demonstrated to them, that all
mutation consists in motion; yet this happens not from any obscurity in
the thing itself, (for it is not intelligible that anything can depart
either from rest, or from the motion it has, except by motion), but
either by having their natural discourse corrupted with former opinions
received from their masters, or else for this, that they do not at all
bend their mind to the enquiring out of truth.

[Sidenote: Method from principles found out, tending to science simply,
           what it is.]

6. By the knowledge therefore of universals, and of their causes (which
are the first principles by which we know the διότι of things) we have
in the first place their definitions, (which are nothing but the
explication of our simple conceptions.) For example, he that has a true
conception of _place_, cannot be ignorant of this definition, _place is
that space which is possessed or filled adequately by some body_; and
so, he that conceives _motion_ aright, cannot but know that _motion is
the privation of one place, and the acquisition of another_. In the next
place, we have their generations or descriptions; as (for example) that
_a line is made by the motion of a point, superficies by the motion of a
line_, and _one motion by another motion_, &c. It remains, that we
enquire what motion begets such and such effects; as, what motion makes
a straight line, and what a circular; what motion thrusts, what draws,
and by what way; what makes a thing which is seen or heard, to be seen
or heard sometimes in one manner, sometimes in another. Now the method
of this kind of enquiry, is _compositive_. For first we are to observe
what effect a body moved produceth, when we consider nothing in it
besides its motion; and we see presently that this makes a line, or
length; next, what the motion of a long body produces, which we find to
be superficies; and so forwards, till we see what the effects of simple
motion are; and then, in like manner, we are to observe what proceeds
from the addition, multiplication, subtraction, and division, of these
motions, and what effects, what figures, and what properties, they
produce; from which kind of contemplation sprung that part of philosophy
which is called _geometry_.

From this consideration of what is produced by simple motion, we are to
pass to the consideration of what effects one body moved worketh upon
another; and because there may be motion in all the several parts of a
body, yet so as that the whole body remain still in the same place, we
must enquire first, what motion causeth such and such motion in the
whole, that is, when one body invades another body which is either at
rest or in motion, what way, and with what swiftness, the invaded body
shall move; and, again, what motion this second body will generate in a
third, and so forwards. From which contemplation shall be drawn that
part of philosophy which treats of motion.

In the third place we must proceed to the enquiry of such effects as are
made by the motion of the parts of any body, as, how it comes to pass,
that things when they are the same, yet seem not to be the same, but
changed. And here the things we search after are sensible qualities,
such as _light_, _colour_, _transparency_, _opacity_, _sound_, _odour_,
_savour_, _heat_, _cold_, and the like; which because they cannot be
known till we know the causes of sense itself, therefore the
consideration of the causes of _seeing_, _hearing_, _smelling_,
_tasting_, and _touching_, belongs to this third place; and all those
qualities and changes, above mentioned, are to be referred to the fourth
place; which two considerations comprehend that part of philosophy which
is called _physics_. And in these four parts is contained whatsoever in
natural philosophy may be explicated by demonstration, properly so
called. For if a cause were to be rendered of natural appearances in
special, as, what are the motions and influences of the heavenly bodies,
and of their parts, the reason hereof must either be drawn from the
parts of the sciences above mentioned, or no reason at all will be
given, but all left to uncertain conjecture.

After _physics_ we must come to _moral philosophy_; in which we are to
consider the motions of the mind, namely, _appetite_, _aversion_,
_love_, _benevolence_, _hope_, _fear_, _anger_, _emulation_, _envy_,
_&c._; what causes they have, and of what they be causes. And the reason
why these are to be considered after _physics_ is, that they have their
causes in sense and imagination, which are the subject of _physical_
contemplation. Also the reason, why all these things are to be searched
after in the order above-said, is, that physics cannot be understood,
except we know first what motions are in the smallest parts of bodies;
nor such motion of parts, till we know what it is that makes another
body move; nor this, till we know what simple motion will effect. And
because all appearance of things to sense is determined, and made to be
of such and such quality and quantity by compounded motions, every one
of which has a certain degree of velocity, and a certain and determined
way; therefore, in the first place, we are to search out the ways of
motion simply (in which geometry consists); next the ways of such
generated motions as are manifest; and, lastly, the ways of internal and
invisible motions (which is the enquiry of natural philosophers). And,
therefore, they that study natural philosophy, study in vain, except
they begin at geometry; and such writers or disputers thereof, as are
ignorant of geometry, do but make their readers and hearers lose their
time.

[Sidenote: That method of civil and natural science, proceeding from
           sense to principles, is analytical; and again, that which
           begins at principles is synthetical.]

7. _Civil_ and _moral philosophy_ do not so adhere to one another, but
that they may be severed. For the causes of the motions of the mind are
known, not only by ratiocination, but also by the experience of every
man that takes the pains to observe those motions within himself. And,
therefore, not only they that have attained the knowledge of the
passions and perturbations of the mind, by the _synthetical method_, and
from the very first principles of philosophy, may by proceeding in the
same way, come to the causes and necessity of constituting
commonwealths, and to get the knowledge of what is natural right, and
what are civil duties; and, in every kind of government, what are the
rights of the commonwealth, and all other knowledge appertaining to
civil philosophy; for this reason, that the principles of the politics
consist in the knowledge of the motions of the mind, and the knowledge
of these motions from the knowledge of sense and imagination; but even
they also that have not learned the first part of philosophy, namely,
_geometry_ and _physics_, may, notwithstanding, attain the principles of
civil philosophy, by the _analytical method_. For if a question be
propounded, as, _whether such an action be just or unjust_; if that
_unjust_ be resolved into _fact against law_, and that notion _law_ into
the _command_ of him or them that have _coercive power_; and that
_power_ be derived from the _wills_ of men that constitute such power,
to the end they may live in peace, they may at last come to this, that
the appetites of men and the passions of their minds are such, that,
unless they be restrained by some power, they will always be making war
upon one another; which may be known to be so by any man's experience,
that will but examine his own mind. And, therefore, from hence he may
proceed, by compounding, to the determination of the justice or
injustice of any propounded action. So that it is manifest, by what has
been said, that the method of philosophy, to such as seek science
simply, without propounding to themselves the solution of any particular
question, is partly analytical, and partly synthetical; namely, that
which proceeds from sense to the invention of principles, analytical;
and the rest synthetical.

[Sidenote: The method of searching out, whether anything propounded be
           matter or accident.]

8. To those that seek the cause of some certain and propounded
appearance or effect, it happens, sometimes, that they know not whether
the thing, whose cause is sought after, be matter or body, or some
accident of a body. For though in geometry, when the cause is sought of
magnitude, or proportion, or figure, it be certainly known that these
things, namely magnitude, proportion, and figure, are accidents; yet in
natural philosophy, where all questions are concerning the causes of the
phantasms of sensible things, it is not so easy to discern between the
things themselves, from which those phantasms proceed, and the
appearances of those things to the sense; which have deceived many,
especially when the phantasms have been made by light. For example, a
man that looks upon the sun, has a certain shining idea of the magnitude
of about a foot over, and this he calls the sun, though he know the sun
to be truly a great deal bigger; and, in like manner, the phantasm of
the same thing appears sometimes round, by being seen afar off, and
sometimes square, by being nearer. Whereupon it may well be doubted,
whether that phantasm be matter, or some body natural, or only some
accident of a body; in the examination of which doubt we may use this
method. The properties of matter and accidents already found out by us,
by the synthetical method, from their definitions, are to be compared
with the idea we have before us; and if it agree with the properties of
matter or body, then it is a body; otherwise it is an accident. Seeing,
therefore, matter cannot by any endeavour of ours be either made or
destroyed, or increased, or diminished, or moved out of its place,
whereas that idea appears, vanishes, is increased and diminished, and
moved hither and thither at pleasure; we may certainly conclude that it
is not a body, but an accident only. And this method is _synthetical_.

[Sidenote: The method of seeking whether any accident be in this or in
           that subject.]

9. But if there be a doubt made concerning the subject of any known
accident (for this may be doubted sometimes, as in the precedent
example, doubt may be made in what subject that splendour and apparent
magnitude of the sun is), then our enquiry must proceed in this manner.
First, matter in general must be divided into parts, as, into object,
medium, and the sentient itself, or such other parts as seem most
conformable to the thing propounded. Next, these parts are severally to
be examined how they agree with the definition of the subject; and such
of them as are not capable of that accident are to be rejected. For
example, if by any true ratiocination the sun be found to be greater
than its apparent magnitude, then that magnitude is not in the sun; if
the sun be in one determined straight line, and one determined distance,
and the magnitude and splendour be seen in more lines and distances than
one, as it is in reflection or refraction, then neither that splendour
nor apparent magnitude are in the sun itself, and, therefore, the body
of the sun cannot be the subject of that splendour and magnitude. And
for the same reasons the air and other parts will be rejected, till at
last nothing remain which can be the subject of that splendour and
magnitude but the sentient itself. And this method, in regard the
subject is divided into parts, is analytical; and in regard the
properties, both of the subject and accident, are compared with the
accident concerning whose subject the enquiry is made, it is
synthetical.

[Sidenote: Method of searching for the cause of any effect, propounded.]

10. But when we seek after the cause of any propounded effect, we must
in the first place get into our mind an exact notion or idea of that
which we call cause, namely, that _a cause is the sum or aggregate of
all such accidents, both in the agents and the patient, as concur to the
producing of the effect propounded; all which existing together, it
cannot be understood but that the effect existeth with them; or that it
can possibly exist if any one of them be absent_. This being known, in
the next place we must examine singly every accident that accompanies or
precedes the effect, as far forth as it seems to conduce in any manner
to the production of the same, and see whether the propounded effect may
be conceived to exist, without the existence of any of those accidents;
and by this means separate such accidents, as do not concur, from such
as concur to produce the said effect; which being done, we are to put
together the concurring accidents, and consider whether we can possibly
conceive, that when these are all present, the effect propounded will
not follow; and if it be evident that the effect will follow, then that
aggregate of accidents is the entire cause, otherwise not; but we must
still search out and put together other accidents. For example, if the
cause of light be propounded to be sought out; first, we examine things
without us, and find that whensoever light appears, there is some
principal object, as it were the fountain of light, without which we
cannot have any perception of light; and, therefore, the concurrence of
that object is necessary to the generation of light. Next we consider
the medium, and find, that unless it be disposed in a certain manner,
namely, that it be transparent, though the object remain the same, yet
the effect will not follow; and, therefore, the concurrence of
transparency is also necessary to the generation of light. Thirdly, we
observe our own body, and find that by the indisposition of the eyes,
the brain, the nerves, and the heart, that is, by obstructions,
stupidity, and debility, we are deprived of light, so that a fitting
disposition of the organs to receive impressions from without is
likewise a necessary part of the cause of light. Again, of all the
accidents inherent in the object, there is none that can conduce to the
effecting of light, but only action (or a certain motion), which cannot
be conceived to be wanting, whensoever the effect is present; for, that
anything may shine, it is not requisite that it be of such or such
magnitude or figure, or that the whole body of it be moved out of the
place it is in (unless it may perhaps be said, that in the sun, or other
body, that which causes light is the light it hath in itself; which yet
is but a trifling exception, seeing nothing is meant thereby but the
cause of light; as if any man should say that the cause of light is that
in the sun which produceth it); it remains, therefore, that the action,
by which light is generated, is motion only in the parts of the object.
Which being understood, we may easily conceive what it is the medium
contributes, namely, the continuation of that motion to the eye; and,
lastly, what the eye and the rest of the organs of the sentient
contribute, namely, the continuation of the same motion to the last
organ of sense, the heart. And in this manner the cause of light may be
made up of motion continued from the original of the same motion, to the
original of vital motion, light being nothing but the alteration of
vital motion, made by the impression upon it of motion continued from
the object. But I give this only for an example, for I shall speak more
at large of light, and the generation of it, in its proper place. In the
mean time it is manifest, that in the searching out of causes, there is
need partly of the analytical, and partly of the synthetical method; of
the analytical, to conceive how circumstances conduce severally to the
production of effects; and of the synthetical, for the adding together
and compounding of what they can effect singly by themselves. And thus
much may serve for the method of invention. It remains that I speak of
the method of teaching, that is, of demonstration, and of the means by
which we demonstrate.

[Sidenote: Words serve to invention as marks; to demonstration as
           signs.]

11. In the method of invention, the use of words consists in this, that
they may serve for marks, by which, whatsoever we have found out may be
recalled to memory; for without this all our inventions perish, nor will
it be possible for us to go on from principles beyond a syllogism or
two, by reason of the weakness of memory. For example, if any man, by
considering a triangle set before him, should find that all its angles
together taken are equal to two right angles, and that by thinking of
the same tacitly, without any use of words either understood or
expressed; and it should happen afterwards that another triangle, unlike
the former, or the same in different situation, should be offered to his
consideration, he would not know readily whether the same property were
in this last or no, but would be forced, as often as a different
triangle were brought before him (and the difference of triangles is
infinite) to begin his contemplation anew; which he would have no need
to do if he had the use of names, for every universal name denotes the
conceptions we have of infinite singular things. Nevertheless, as I said
above, they serve as _marks_ for the help of our memory, whereby we
register to ourselves our own inventions; but not as _signs_ by which we
declare the same to others; so that a man may be a philosopher alone by
himself, without any master; Adam had this capacity. But to teach, that
is, to demonstrate, supposes two at the least, and syllogistical speech.

[Sidenote: The method of demonstration is synthetical.]

12. And seeing teaching is nothing but leading the mind of him we teach,
to the knowledge of our inventions, in that track by which we attained
the same with our own mind; therefore, the same method that served for
our invention, will serve also for demonstration to others, saving that
we omit the first part of method which proceeded from the sense of
things to universal principles, which, because they are principles,
cannot be demonstrated; and seeing they are known by nature, (as was
said above in the 5th article) they need no demonstration, though they
need explication. The whole method, therefore, of demonstration, is
_synthetical_, consisting of that order of speech which begins from
primary or most universal propositions, which are manifest of
themselves, and proceeds by a perpetual composition of propositions into
syllogisms, till at last the learner understand the truth of the
conclusion sought after.

[Sidenote: Definitions only are primary, & universal propositions.]

13. Now, such principles are nothing but definitions, whereof there are
two sorts; one of names, that signify such things as have some
conceivable cause, and another of such names as signify things of which
we can conceive no cause at all. Names of the former kind are, _body_,
or _matter_, _quantity_, or _extension_, _motion_, and whatsoever is
common to all matter. Of the second kind, are _such a body_, _such and
so great motion_, _so great magnitude_, _such figure_, and whatsoever we
can distinguish one body from another by. And names of the former kind
are well enough defined, when, by speech as short as may be, we raise in
the mind of the hearer perfect and clear ideas or conceptions of the
things named, as when we define motion to be _the leaving of one place,
and the acquiring of another continually_; for though no thing moved,
nor any cause of motion be in that definition, yet, at the hearing of
that speech, there will come into the mind of the hearer an _idea_ of
motion clear enough. But definitions of things, which may be understood
to have some cause, must consist of such names as express the cause or
manner of their generation, as when we define a circle to be a figure
made by the circumduction of a straight line in a plane, &c. Besides
definitions, there is no other proposition that ought to be called
primary, or (according to severe truth) be received into the number of
principles. For those _axioms of Euclid_, seeing they may be
demonstrated, are no principles of demonstration, though they have by
the consent of all men gotten the authority of principles, because they
need not be demonstrated. Also, those _petitions_, or _postulata_, (as
they call them) though they be principles, yet they are not principles
of demonstration, but of construction only; that is, not of science, but
of power; or (which is all one) not of _theorems_, which are
speculations, but of _problems_, which belong to practice, or the doing
of something. But as for those common received opinions, _Nature abhors
vacuity_, _Nature doth nothing in vain_, and the like, which are neither
evident in themselves, nor at all to be demonstrated, and which are
oftener false than true, they are much less to be acknowledged for
principles.

To return, therefore, to definitions; the reason why I say that the
cause and generation of such things, as have any cause or generation,
ought to enter into their definitions, is this. The end of science is
the demonstration of the causes and generations of things; which if they
be not in the definitions, they cannot be found in the conclusion of the
first syllogism, that is made from those definitions; and if they be not
in the first conclusion, they will not be found in any further
conclusion deduced from that; and, therefore, by proceeding in this
manner, we shall never come to science; which is against the scope and
intention of demonstration.

[Sidenote: The nature & definition of a definition.]

14. Now, seeing definitions (as I have said) are principles, or primary
propositions, they are therefore speeches; and seeing they are used for
the raising of an _idea_ of some thing in the mind of the learner,
whensoever that thing has a name, the definition of it can be nothing
but the explication of that name by speech; and if that name be given it
for some compounded conception, the definition is nothing but a
resolution of that name into its most universal parts. As when we define
man, saying _man is a body animated, sentient, rational_, those names,
_body animated_, _&c._ are parts of that whole name _man_; so that
definitions of this kind always consist of _genus_ and _difference_; the
former names being all, till the last, _general_; and the last of all,
_difference_. But if any name be the most universal in its kind, then
the definition of it cannot consist of _genus_ and _difference_, but is
to be made by such circumlocution, as best explicateth the force of that
name. Again, it is possible, and happens often, that the _genus_ and
_difference_ are put together, and yet make no definition; as these
words, _a straight line_, contain both the _genus_ and _difference_; but
are not a definition, unless we should think a straight line may be thus
defined, _a straight line is a straight line_: and yet if there were
added another name, consisting of different words, but signifying the
same thing which these signify, then these might be the definition of
that name. From what has been said, it may be understood how a
definition ought to be defined, namely, _that it is a proposition, whose
predicate resolves the subject, when it may; and when it may not, it
exemplifies the same_.

[Sidenote: Properties of a definition.]

15. The properties of a definition are:

First, that it takes away equivocation, as also all that multitude of
distinctions, which are used by such as think they may learn philosophy
by disputation. For the nature of a definition is to define, that is, to
determine the signification of the defined name, and to pare from it all
other signification besides what is contained in the definition itself;
and therefore one definition does as much, as all the distinctions (how
many soever) that can be used about the name defined.

Secondly, that it gives an universal notion of the thing defined,
representing a certain universal picture thereof, not to the eye, but to
the mind. For as when one paints a man, he paints the image of some man;
so he, that defines the name man, makes a representation of some man to
the mind.

Thirdly, that it is not necessary to dispute whether definitions are to
be admitted or no. For when a master is instructing his scholar, if the
scholar understand all the parts of the thing defined, which are
resolved in the definition, and yet will not admit of the definition,
there needs no further controversy betwixt them, it being all one as if
he refused to be taught. But if he understand nothing, then certainly
the definition is faulty; for the nature of a definition consists in
this, that it exhibit a clear idea of the thing defined; and principles
are either known by themselves, or else they are not principles.

Fourthly, that, in philosophy, definitions are before defined names. For
in teaching philosophy, the first beginning is from definitions; and all
progression in the same, till we come to the knowledge of the thing
compounded, is compositive. Seeing, therefore, definition is the
explication of a compounded name by resolution, and the progression is
from the parts to the compound, definitions must be understood before
compounded names; nay, when the names of the parts of any speech be
explicated, it is not necessary that the definition should be a name
compounded of them. For example, when these names, _equilateral_,
_quadrilateral_, _right-angled_, are sufficiently understood, it is not
necessary in geometry that there should be at all such a name as
_square_; for defined names are received in philosophy for brevity's
sake only.

Fifthly, that compounded names, which are defined one way in some one
part of philosophy, may in another part of the same be otherwise
defined; as a _parabola_ and an _hyperbole_ have one definition in
geometry, and another in rhetoric; for definitions are instituted and
serve for the understanding of the doctrine which is treated of. And,
therefore, as in one part of philosophy, a definition may have in it
some one fit name for the more brief explanation of some proposition in
geometry; so it may have the same liberty in other parts of philosophy;
for the use of names is particular (even where many agree to the
settling of them) and arbitrary.

Sixthly, that no name can be defined by any one word; because no one
word is sufficient for the resolving of one or more words.

Seventhly, that a defined name ought not to be repeated in the
definition. For a defined name is the whole compound, and a definition
is the resolution of that compound into parts; but no total can be part
of itself.

[Sidenote: Nature of a demonstration.]

16. Any two definitions, that may be compounded into a syllogism,
produce a conclusion; which, because it is derived from principles, that
is, from definitions, is said to be demonstrated; and the derivation or
composition itself is called a demonstration. In like manner, if a
syllogism be made of two propositions, whereof one is a definition, the
other a demonstrated conclusion, or neither of them is a definition, but
both formerly demonstrated, that syllogism is also called a
demonstration, and so successively. The definition therefore of a
demonstration is this, _a demonstration is a syllogism, or series of
syllogisms, derived and continued, from the definitions of names, to the
last conclusion_. And from hence it may be understood, that all true
ratiocination, which taketh its beginning from true principles,
produceth science, and is true demonstration. For as for the original of
the name, although that, which the Greeks called ἀποδέιξις, and the
Latins _demonstratio_, was understood by them for that sort only of
ratiocination, in which, by the describing of certain lines and figures,
they placed the thing they were to prove, as it were before men's eyes,
which is properly ἀποδεικνύειν, or to _shew_ by the figure; yet they
seem to have done it for this reason, that unless it were in geometry,
(in which only there is place for such figures) there was no
ratiocination certain, and ending in science, their doctrines concerning
all other things being nothing but controversy and clamour; which,
nevertheless, happened, not because the truth to which they pretended
could not be made evident without figures, but because they wanted true
principles, from which they might derive their ratiocination; and,
therefore, there is no reason but that if true definitions were premised
in all sorts of doctrines, the demonstrations also would be true.

[Sidenote: Properties of a demonstration, and order of things to be
           demonstrated.]

17. It. is proper to methodical demonstration,

First, that there be a true succession of one reason to another,
according to the rules of syllogizing delivered above.

Secondly, that the premises of all syllogisms be demonstrated from the
first definitions.

Thirdly, that after definitions, he that teaches or demonstrates any
thing, proceed in the same method by which he found it out; namely, that
in the first place those things be demonstrated, which immediately
succeed to universal definitions (in which is contained that part of
philosophy which is called _philosophia prima_). Next, those things
which may be demonstrated by simple motion (in which geometry consists).
After geometry, such things as may be taught or shewed by manifest
action, that is, by thrusting from, or pulling towards. And after these,
the motion or mutation of the invisible parts of things, and the
doctrine of sense and imaginations, and of the internal passions,
especially those of men, in which are comprehended the grounds of civil
duties, or civil philosophy; which takes up the last place. And that
this method ought to be kept in all sorts of philosophy, is evident from
hence, that such things as I have said are to be taught last, cannot be
demonstrated, till such as are propounded to be first treated of, be
fully understood. Of which method no other example can be given, but
that treatise of the elements of philosophy, which I shall begin in the
next chapter, and continue to the end of the work.

[Sidenote: Faults of a demonstration.]

18. Besides those _paralogisms_, whose fault lies either in the falsity
of the premises, or the want of true composition, of which I have spoken
in the precedent chapter, there are two more, which are frequent in
demonstration; one whereof is commonly called _petitio principii_; the
other is the supposing of a _false cause_; and these do not only deceive
unskilful learners, but sometimes masters themselves, by making them
take that for well demonstrated, which is not demonstrated at all.
_Petitio principii_ is, when the conclusion to be proved is disguised in
other words, and put for the definition or principle from whence it is
to be demonstrated; and thus, by putting for the cause of the thing
sought, either the thing itself or some effect of it, they make a circle
in their demonstration. As for example, he that would demonstrate that
the earth stands still in the centre of the world, and should suppose
the earth's gravity to be the cause thereof, and define gravity to be a
quality by which every heavy body tends towards the centre of the world,
would lose his labour; for the question is, what is the cause of that
quality in the earth? and, therefore, he that supposes gravity to be the
cause, puts the thing itself for its own cause.

Of a _false cause_ I find this example in a certain treatise where the
thing to be demonstrated is the motion of the earth. He begins,
therefore, with this, that seeing the earth and the sun are not always
in the same situation, it must needs be that one of them be locally
moved, which is true; next, he affirms that the vapours, which the sun
raises from the earth and sea, are, by reason of this motion,
necessarily moved, which also is true; from whence he infers the winds
are made, and this may pass for granted; and by these winds he says, the
waters of the sea are moved, and by their motion the bottom of the sea,
as if it were beaten forwards, moves round; and let this also be
granted; wherefore, he concludes, the earth is moved; which is,
nevertheless, a paralogism. For, if that wind were the cause why the
earth was, from the beginning, moved round, and the motion either of the
sun or the earth were the cause of that wind, then the motion of the sun
or the earth was before the wind itself; and if the earth were moved,
before the wind was made, then the wind could not be the cause of the
earth's revolution; but, if the sun were moved, and the earth stand
still, then it is manifest the earth might remain unmoved,
notwithstanding that wind; and therefore that motion was not made by the
cause which he allegeth. But paralogisms of this kind are very frequent
among the writers of _physics_, though none can be more elaborate than
this in the example given.

[Sidenote: Why the analytical method of geometricians cannot be treated
           of in this place.]

19. It may to some men seem pertinent to treat in this place of that art
of the geometricians, which they call _logistica_, that is, the art, by
which, from supposing the thing in question to be true, they proceed by
ratiocination, till either they come to something known, by which they
may demonstrate the truth of the thing sought for; or to something which
is impossible, from whence they collect that to be false, which they
supposed true. But this art cannot be explicated here, for this reason,
that the method of it can neither be practised, nor understood, unless
by such as are well versed in geometry; and among geometricians
themselves, they, that have most theorems in readiness, are the most
ready in the use of this _logistica_; so that, indeed, it is not a
distinct thing from geometry itself; for there are, in the method of it,
three parts; the first whereof consists in the finding out of equality
betwixt known and unknown things, which they call equation; and this
equation cannot be found out, but by such as know perfectly the nature,
properties, and transpositions of proportion, as also the addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division of lines and superficies, and
the extraction of roots; which are the parts of no mean geometrician.
The second is, when an equation is found, to be able to judge whether
the truth or falsity of the question may be deduced from it, or no;
which yet requires greater knowledge. And the third is, when such an
equation is found, as is fit for the solution of the question, to know
how to resolve the same in such manner, that the truth or falsity may
thereby manifestly appear; which, in hard questions, cannot be done
without the knowledge of the nature of crooked-lined figures; but he
that understands readily the nature and properties of these, is a
complete geometrician. It happens besides, that for the finding out of
equations, there is no certain method, but he is best able to do it,
that has the best natural wit.




                                PART II.

                                  THE
                      FIRST GROUNDS OF PHILOSOPHY.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER VII.

                           OF PLACE AND TIME.

1. Things that have no existence, may nevertheless be understood and
    computed.—2. What is Space.—3. Time.—4. Part.—5. Division.—6.
    One.—7. Number.—8. Composition.—9. The whole.—10. Spaces and times
    contiguous, and continual.—11. Beginning, end, way, finite,
    infinite.—12. What is infinite in power. Nothing infinite can be
    truly said to be either whole, or one; nor infinite spaces or times,
    many.—13. Division proceeds not to the least.


[Sidenote: Things that have no existence, may nevertheless be understood
           and computed.]

1. In the teaching of natural philosophy, I cannot begin better (as I
have already shewn) than from _privation_; that is, from feigning the
world to be annihilated. But, if such annihilation of all things be
supposed, it may perhaps be asked, what would remain for any man (whom
only I except from this universal annihilation of things) to consider as
the subject of philosophy, or at all to reason upon; or what to give
names unto for ratiocination's sake.

I say, therefore, there would remain to that man ideas of the world, and
of all such bodies as he had, before their annihilation, seen with his
eyes, or perceived by any other sense; that is to say, the memory and
imagination of magnitudes, motions, sounds, colours, &c. as also of
their order and parts. All which things, though they be nothing but
ideas and phantasms, happening internally to him that imagineth; yet
they will appear as if they were external, and not at all depending upon
any power of the mind. And these are the things to which he would give
names, and subtract them from, and compound them with one another. For
seeing, that after the destruction of all other things, I suppose man
still remaining, and namely that he thinks, imagines, and remembers,
there can be nothing for him to think of but what is past; nay, if we do
but observe diligently what it is we do when we consider and reason, we
shall find, that though all things be still remaining in the world, yet
we compute nothing but our own phantasms. For when we calculate the
magnitude and motions of heaven or earth, we do not ascend into heaven
that we may divide it into parts, or measure the motions thereof, but we
do it sitting still in our closets or in the dark. Now things may be
considered, that is, be brought into account, either as internal
accidents of our mind, in which manner we consider them when the
question is about some faculty of the mind; or as species of external
things, not as really existing, but appearing only to exist, or to have
a being without us. And in this manner we are now to consider them.

[Sidenote: What is Space.]

2. If therefore we remember, or have a phantasm of any thing that was in
the world before the supposed annihilation of the same; and consider,
not that the thing was such or such, but only that it had a being
without the mind, we have presently a conception of that we call
_space_: an imaginary space indeed, because a mere phantasm, yet that
very thing which all men call so. For no man calls it space for being
already filled, but because it may be filled; nor does any man think
bodies carry their places away with them, but that the same space
contains sometimes one, sometimes another body; which could not be if
space should always accompany the body which is once in it. And this is
of itself so manifest, that I should not think it needed any explaining
at all, but that I find space to be falsely defined by certain
philosophers, who infer from thence, one, that the world is infinite
(for taking _space_ to be the extension of bodies, and thinking
extension may encrease continually, he infers that bodies may be
infinitely extended); and, another, from the same definition, concludes
rashly, that it is impossible even to God himself to create more worlds
than one; for, if another world were to be created, he says, that seeing
there is nothing without this world, and therefore (according to his
definition) no space, that new world must be placed in nothing; but in
nothing nothing can be placed; which he affirms only, without showing
any reason for the same; whereas the contrary is the truth: for more
cannot be put into a place already filled, so much is empty space fitter
than that, which is full, for the receiving of new bodies. Having
therefore spoken thus much for these men's sakes, and for theirs that
assent to them, I return to my purpose, and define _space_ thus: SPACE
_is the phantasm of a thing existing without the mind simply_; that is
to say, that phantasm, in which we consider no other accident, but only
that it appears without us.

[Sidenote: Time.]

3. As a body leaves a phantasm of its magnitude in the mind, so also a
moved body leaves a phantasm of its motion, namely, an idea of that body
passing out of one space into another by continual succession. And this
idea, or phantasm, is that, which (without receding much from the common
opinion, or from _Aristotle's_ definition) I call _Time_. For seeing all
men confess a year to be time, and yet do not think a year to be the
accident or affection of any body, they must needs confess it to be, not
in the things without us, but only in the thought of the mind. So when
they speak of the times of their predecessors, they do not think after
their predecessors are gone, that their times can be any where else than
in the memory of those that remember them. And as for those that say,
days, years, and months are the motions of the sun and moon, seeing it
is all one to say, motion _past_ and motion _destroyed_, and that
_future_ motion is the same with motion which _is not yet begun_, they
say that, which they do not mean, that there neither is, nor has been,
nor shall be any time: for of whatsoever it may be said, _it has been_
or _it shall be_, of the same also it might have been said heretofore,
or may be said hereafter, _it is_. What then can days, months, and
years, be, but the names of such computations made in our mind? _Time_
therefore is a phantasm, but a phantasm of motion, for if we would know
by what moments time passes away, we make use of some motion or other,
as of the sun, of a clock, of the sand in an hour-glass, or we mark some
line upon which we imagine something to be moved, there being no other
means by which we can take notice of any time at all. And yet, when I
say _time_ is a phantasm of motion, I do not say this is sufficient to
define it by; for this word _time_ comprehends the notion of _former_
and _latter_, or of _succession_ in the motion of a body, in as much as
it is first _here_ then _there_. Wherefore a complete definition of
_time_ is such as this, TIME _is the phantasm of before and after in
motion_; which agrees with this definition of _Aristotle_, _time is the
number of motion according to former and latter_; for that numbering is
an act of the mind; and therefore it is all one to say, _time is the
number of motion according to former and latter_; and _time is a
phantasm of motion numbered_. But that other definition, _time is the
measure of motion_, is not so exact, for we measure time by motion and
not motion by time.

[Sidenote: Part.]

4. One space is called _part_ of another space, and one time _part_ of
another time, when this contains that and something besides. From whence
it may be collected, that nothing can rightly be called a PART, but that
which is compared with something that contains it.

[Sidenote: Division.]

5. And therefore to _make parts_, or to _part_ or DIVIDE space or
_time_, is nothing else but to consider one and another within the same;
so that if any man _divide_ space or time, the diverse conceptions he
has are more, by one, than the parts he makes; for his first conception
is of that which is to be divided, then of some part of it, and again of
some other part of it, and so forwards as long as he goes on in
dividing.

But it is to be noted, that here, by _division_, I do not mean the
severing or pulling asunder of one space or time from another (for does
any man think that one hemisphere may be separated from the other
hemisphere, or the first hour from the second?) but diversity of
consideration; so that division is not made by the operation of the
hands but of the mind.

[Sidenote: One.]

6. When space or time is considered among other spaces or times, it is
said to be ONE, namely _one of them_; for except one space might be
added to another, and subtracted from another space, and so of time, it
would be sufficient to say space or time simply, and superfluous to say
one space or one time, if it could not be conceived that there were
another. The common definition of _one_, namely, that _one is that which
is undivided_, is obnoxious to an absurd consequence; for it may thence
be inferred, that whatsoever is divided is many things, that is, that
every divided thing, is divided things, which is insignificant.

[Sidenote: Number.]

7. NUMBER is _one_ and _one_, or _one one_ and _one_, and so forwards;
namely, _one_ and _one_ make the number _two_, and _one one_ and _one_
the number _three_; so are all other numbers made; which is all one as
if we should say, _number is unities_.

[Sidenote: Composition.]

8. To COMPOUND space of spaces, or time of times, is first to consider
them one after another, and then altogether as one; as if one should
reckon first the head, the feet, the arms, and the body, severally, and
then for the account of them all together put _man_. And that which is
so put for all the severals of which it consists, is called the WHOLE;
and those severals, when by the division of the whole they come again to
be considered singly, are parts thereof; and therefore the _whole_ and
_all the parts taken together_ are the same thing. And as I noted above,
that in _division_ it is not necessary to pull the parts asunder; so in
_composition_, it is to be understood, that for the making up of a whole
there is no need of putting the parts together, so as to make them touch
one another, but only of collecting them into one sum in the mind. For
thus all men, being considered together, make up the whole of mankind,
though never so much dispersed by time and place; and twelve hours,
though the hours of several days, may be compounded into one number of
twelve.

[Sidenote: The whole.]

9. This being well understood, it is manifest, that nothing can rightly
be called a whole, that is not conceived to be compounded of parts, and
that it may be divided into parts; so that if we deny that a thing has
parts, we deny the same to be a whole. For example, if we say the soul
can have no parts, we affirm that no soul can be a whole soul. Also it
is manifest, that nothing has parts till it be divided; and when a thing
is divided, the parts are only so many as the division makes them.
Again, that a part of a part is a part of the whole; and thus any part
of the number _four_, as _two_, is a part of the number _eight_; for
_four_ is made of _two_ and _two_; but _eight_ is compounded of _two_,
_two_, and _four_, and therefore _two_, which is a part of the part
_four_, is also a part of the whole _eight_.

[Sidenote: Spaces and times contiguous and continual.]

10. Two spaces are said to be CONTIGUOUS, when there is no other space
betwixt them. But two times, betwixt which there is no other time, are
called immediate, as A B, B C.[Sidenote: A    B    C] And any two
spaces, as well as times, are said to be CONTINUAL, when they have one
common part, as A C, B D, where the part B C is common; [Sidenote:
A   B   C   D] and more spaces and times are continual, when every two
which are next one another are continual.

                             A   B   C   D
                             -------------

                              A    B     C
                              ------------

[Sidenote: Beginning, end, way, finite, infinite.]

11. That part which is between two other parts, is called a MEAN; and
that which is not between two other parts, an EXTREME. And of extremes,
that which is first reckoned is the BEGINNING, and that which last, the
END; and all the means together taken are the WAY. Also, _extreme parts_
and _limits_ are the same thing. And from hence it is manifest, that
_beginning_ and _end_ depend upon the order in which we number them; and
that to _terminate_ or _limit_ space and time, is the same thing with
_imagining their beginning and end_; as also that every thing is FINITE
or INFINITE, according as we imagine or not imagine it _limited_ or
_terminated_ every way; and that the _limits_ of any number are
_unities_, and of these, that which is the first in our numbering is the
_beginning_, and that which we number last, is the _end_. When we say
number is _infinite_, we mean only that no number is expressed; for when
we speak of the numbers _two_, _three_, _a thousand_, &c. they are
always _finite_. But when no more is said but this, _number is
infinite_, it is to be understood as if it were said, this name _number_
is an _indefinite_ name.

[Sidenote: What is infinite in power. Nothing infinite can be truly said
           to be either whole or one; nor infinite spaces or times,
           many.]

12. Space or time is said to _finite in power_, or _terminable_, when
there may be assigned a number of finite spaces or times, as of paces or
hours, than which there can be no greater number of the same measure in
that space or time; and _infinite in power_ is that space or time, in
which a greater number of the said paces or hours may be assigned, than
any number that can be given. But we must note, that, although in that
space or time which is infinite in power, there may be numbered more
paces or hours than any number that can be assigned, yet their number
will always be finite; for every number is finite. And therefore his
ratiocination was not good, that undertaking to prove the world to be
finite, reasoned thus; _If the world be infinite, then there may be
taken in it some part which is distant from us an infinite number of
paces: but no such part can be taken; wherefore the world is not
infinite_; because that consequence of the major proposition is false;
for in an infinite space, whatsoever we take or design in our mind, the
distance of the same from us is a finite space; for in the very
designing of the place thereof, we put an end to that space, of which we
ourselves are the beginning; and whatsoever any man with his mind cuts
off both ways from infinite, he determines the same, that is, he makes
it finite.

Of infinite space or time, it cannot be said that it is a _whole_ or
_one_: not a _whole_, because not compounded of parts; for seeing parts,
how many soever they be, are severally finite, they will also, when they
are all put together, make a whole finite: nor _one_, because nothing
can be said to be one, except there be another to compare it with; but
it cannot be conceived that there are two spaces, or two times,
infinite. Lastly, when we make question whether the world be finite or
infinite, we have nothing in our mind answering to the name _world_; for
whatsoever we imagine, is therefore finite, though our computation reach
the fixed stars, or the ninth or tenth, nay, the thousandth sphere. The
meaning of the question is this only, whether God has actually made so
great an addition of body to body, as we are able to make of space to
space.

[Sidenote: Division proceeds not to the least.]

13. And, therefore, that which is commonly said, that space and time may
be divided infinitely, is not to be so understood, as if there might be
any infinite or eternal division; but rather to be taken in this sense,
_whatsoever is divided, is divided into such parts as may again be
divided_; or thus, _the least divisible thing is not to be given_; or,
as geometricians have it, _no quantity is so small, but a less may be
taken_; which may easily be demonstrated in this manner. Let any space
or time, that which was thought to be the least divisible, be divided
into two equal parts, A and B. I say either of them, as A, may be
divided again. For suppose the part A to be contiguous to the part B of
one side, and of the other side to some other space equal to B. This
whole space, therefore, being greater than the space given, is
divisible. Wherefore, if it be divided into two equal parts, the part in
the middle, which is A, will be also divided into two equal parts; and
therefore A was divisible.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER VIII.

                         OF BODY AND ACCIDENT.

1. Body defined.—2. Accident defined.—3. How an accident may be
    understood to be in its subject.—4. Magnitude, what it is.—5. Place,
    what it is, and that it is immovable.—6. What is full and empty.—7.
    Here, there, somewhere, what they signify.—8. Many bodies cannot be
    in one place, nor one body in many places.—9. Contiguous and
    continual, what they are.—10. The definition of motion. No motion
    intelligible but with time.—11. What it is to be at rest, to have
    been moved, and to be moved. No motion to be conceived, without the
    conception of past and future.—12. A point, a line, superficies and
    solid, what they are.—13. Equal, greater, and less in bodies and
    magnitudes, what they are.—14. One and the same body has always one
    and the same magnitude.—15. Velocity, what it is.—16. Equal,
    greater, and less in times, what they are.—17. Equal, greater, and
    less, in velocity, what.—18. Equal, greater, and less, in motion,
    what.—19. That which is at rest, will always be at rest, except it
    be moved by some external thing; and that which is moved, will
    always be moved, unless it be hindered by some external thing.—20.
    Accidents are generated and destroyed, but bodies not so.—21. An
    accident cannot depart from its subject.—22. Nor be moved.—23.
    Essence, form, and matter, what they are.—24. First matter,
    what.—25. That the whole is greater than any part thereof, why
    demonstrated.


[Sidenote: Body defined.]

1. Having understood what imaginary space is, in which we supposed
nothing remaining without us, but all those things to be destroyed,
that, by existing heretofore, left images of themselves in our minds;
let us now suppose some one of those things to be placed again in the
world, or created anew. It is necessary, therefore, that this
new-created or replaced thing do not only fill some part of the space
above mentioned, or be coincident and coextended with it, but also that
it have no dependance upon our thought. And this is that which, for the
extension of it, we commonly call _body_; and because it depends not
upon our thought, we say is _a thing subsisting of itself_; as also
_existing_, because without us; and, lastly, it is called the _subject_,
because it is so placed in and _subjected_ to imaginary space, that it
may be understood by reason, as well as perceived by sense. The
definition, therefore, of _body_ may be this, a _body is that, which
having no dependance upon our thought, is coincident or coextended with
some part of space_.

[Sidenote: Accident defined.]

2. But what an _accident_ is cannot so easily be explained by any
definition, as by examples. Let us imagine, therefore, that a body fills
any space, or is coextended with it; that coextension is not the
coextended body: and, in like manner, let us imagine that the same body
is removed out of its place; that removing is not the removed body: or
let us think the same not removed; that not removing or rest is not the
resting body. What, then, are these things? They are _accidents_ of that
body. But the thing in question is, _what is an accident?_ which is an
enquiry after that which we know already, and not that which we should
enquire after. For who does not always and in the same manner understand
him that says any thing is extended, or moved, or not moved? But most
men will have it be said that _an accident is something_, namely, some
part of a natural thing, when, indeed, it is no part of the same. To
satisfy these men, as well as may be, they answer best that define an
_accident_ to be _the manner by which any body is conceived_; which is
all one as if they should say, _an accident is that faculty of any body,
by which it works in us a conception of itself_. Which definition,
though it be not an answer to the question propounded, yet it is an
answer to that question which should have been propounded, namely,
_whence does it happen that one part of any body appears here, another
there?_ For this is well answered thus: _it happens from the extension
of that body_. Or, _how comes it to pass that the whole body, by
succession, is seen now here, now there?_ and the answer will be, _by
reason of its motion_. Or, lastly, _whence is it that any body
possesseth the same space for sometime?_ and the answer will be,
_because it is not moved_. For if concerning the name of a body, that
is, concerning a concrete name, it be asked, _what is it?_ the answer
must be made by definition; for the question is concerning the
signification of the name. But if it be asked concerning an abstract
name, _what is it?_ the cause is demanded why a thing appears so or so.
As if it be asked, _what is hard?_ The answer will be, hard is that,
whereof no part gives place, but when the whole gives place. But if it
be demanded, _what is hardness?_ a cause must be shewn why a part does
not give place, except the whole give place. Wherefore, I define an
_accident_ to be _the manner of our conception of body_.

[Sidenote: How an accident may be understood to be in its subject.]

3. When an _accident_ is said _to be in a body_, it is not so to be
understood, as if any thing were contained in that body; as if, for
example, redness were in blood, in the same manner, as blood is in a
bloody cloth, that is, as a part in the whole; for so, an accident would
be a body also. But, as magnitude, or rest, or motion, is in that which
is great, or which resteth, or which is moved, (which, how it is to be
understood, every man understands) so also, it is to be understood, that
every other accident _is in_ its subject. And this, also, is explicated
by _Aristotle_ no otherwise than negatively, namely, that _an accident
is in its subject, not as any part thereof, but so as that it may be
away, the subject still remaining_; which is right, saving that there
are certain accidents which can never perish except the body perish
also; for no body can be conceived to be without extension, or without
figure. All other accidents, which are not common to all bodies, but
peculiar to some only, as _to be at rest_, _to be moved_, _colour_,
_hardness_, and the like, do perish continually, and are succeeded by
others; yet so, as that the body never perisheth. And as for the opinion
that some may have, that all other accidents are not in their bodies in
the same manner that extension, motion, rest, or figure, are in the
same; for example, that colour, heat, odour, virtue, vice, and the like,
are otherwise in them, and, as they say, _inherent_; I desire they would
suspend their judgment for the present, and expect a little, till it be
found out by ratiocination, whether these very accidents are not also
certain motions either of the mind of the perceiver, or of the bodies
themselves which are perceived; for in the search of this, a great part
of natural philosophy consists.

[Sidenote: Magnitude, what it is.]

4. The _extension_ of a body, is the same thing with the _magnitude_ of
it, or that which some call _real space_. But this _magnitude_ does not
depend upon our cogitation, as imaginary space doth; for this is an
effect of our imagination, but _magnitude_ is the cause of it; this is
an accident of the mind, that of a body existing out of the mind.

[Sidenote: Place, what it is, and that it is immovable.]

5. That space, by which word I here understand imaginary space, which is
coincident with the magnitude of any body, is called the _place_ of that
body; and the body itself is that which we call the _thing placed_. Now
_place_, and the _magnitude_ of the thing placed, differ. First in this,
that a body keeps always the same _magnitude_, both when it is at rest,
and when it is moved; but when it is moved, it does not keep the same
_place_. Secondly in this, that _place_ is a phantasm of any body of
such and such quantity and figure; but _magnitude_ is the peculiar
accident of every body; for one body may at several times have several
places, but has always one and the same magnitude. Thirdly in this, that
_place_ is nothing out of the mind, nor _magnitude_ any thing within it.
And lastly, _place_ is feigned extension, but _magnitude_ true
extension; and a placed body is not extension, but a thing extended.
Besides, _place is immovable_; for, seeing that which is moved, is
understood to be carried from place to place, if place were moved, it
would also be carried from place to place, so that one place must have
another place, and that place another place, and so on infinitely, which
is ridiculous. And as for those, that, by making _place_ to be of the
same nature with _real space_, would from thence maintain it to be
immovable, they also make place, though they do not perceive they make
it so, to be a mere phantasm. For whilst one affirms that place is
therefore said to be immovable, because space in general is considered
there; if he had remembered that nothing is general or universal besides
names or signs, he would easily have seen that that space, which he says
is considered in general, is nothing but a phantasm, in the mind or the
memory, of a body of such magnitude and such figure. And whilst another
says: real space is made immovable by the understanding; as when, under
the superficies of running water, we imagine other and other water to
come by continual succession, that superficies fixed there by the
understanding, is the _immovable place_ of the river: what else does he
make it to be but a phantasm, though he do it obscurely and in perplexed
words? Lastly, the nature of _place_ does not consist in the
_superficies of the ambient_, but in _solid space_; for the whole placed
body is coextended with its whole place, and every part of it with every
answering part of the same place; but seeing every placed body is a
solid thing, it cannot be understood to be coextended with superficies.
Besides, how can any whole body be moved, unless all its parts be moved
together with it? Or how can the internal parts of it be moved, but by
leaving their place? But the internal parts of a body cannot leave the
superficies of an external part contiguous to it; and, therefore, it
follows, that if place be the superficies of the ambient, then the parts
of a body moved, that is, bodies moved, are not moved.

[Sidenote: What is full and empty.]

6. Space, or place, that is possessed by a body, is called _full_, and
that which is not so possessed, is called _empty_.

[Sidenote: Here, there, somewhere, what they signify.]

7. _Here_, _there_, _in the country_, _in the city_, and other the like
names, by which answer is made to the question _where is it?_ are not
properly names of place, nor do they of themselves bring into the mind
the place that is sought; for _here_ and _there_ signify nothing, unless
the thing be shewn at the same time with the finger or something else;
but when the eye of him that seeks, is, by pointing or some other sign,
directed to the thing sought, the place of it is not hereby defined by
him that answers, but found out by him that asks the question. Now such
shewings as are made by words only, as when we say, _in the country_, or
_in the city_, are some of greater latitude than others, as when we say,
_in the country_, _in the city_, _in such a street_, _in a house_, _in
the chamber_, _in bed_, &c. For these do, by little and little, direct
the seeker nearer to the proper place; and yet they do not determine the
same, but only restrain it to a lesser space, and signify no more, than
that the place of the thing is within a certain space designed by those
words, as a part is in the whole. And all such names, by which answer is
made to the question _where?_ have, for their highest _genus_, the name
_somewhere_. From whence it may be understood, that whatsoever is
somewhere, is in some place properly so called, which place is part of
that greater space that is signified by some of these names, _in the
country_, _in the city_, or the like.

[Sidenote: Many bodies cannot be in one place, nor one body in many
           places.]

8. A body, and the magnitude, and the place thereof, are divided by one
and the same act of the mind; for, to divide an extended body, and the
extension thereof, and the idea of that extension, which is place, is
the same with dividing any one of them; because they are coincident, and
it cannot be done but by the mind, that is by the division of space.
From whence it is manifest, that neither two bodies can be together in
the same place, nor one body be in two places at the same time. Not two
bodies in the same place; because when a body that fills its whole place
is divided into two, the place itself is divided into two also, so that
there will be two places. Not one body in two places; for the place that
a body fills being divided into two, the placed body will be also
divided into two; for, as I said, a place and the body that fills that
place, are divided both together; and so there will be two bodies.

[Sidenote: Contiguous and continual, what they are.]

9. Two bodies are said to be _contiguous_ to one another, and
_continual_, in the same manner as spaces are; namely, _those are
contiguous, between which there is no space_. Now, by space I
understand, here as formerly, an idea or phantasm of a body. Wherefore,
though between two bodies there be put no other body, and consequently
no magnitude, or, as they call it, real space, yet if another body may
be put between them, that is, if there intercede any imagined space
which may receive another body, then those bodies are not contiguous.
And this is so easy to be understood, that I should wonder at some men,
who being otherwise skilful enough in philosophy, are of a different
opinion, but that I find that most of those that affect metaphysical
subtleties wander from truth, as if they were led out of their way by an
_ignis fatuus_. For can any man that has his natural senses, think that
two bodies must therefore necessarily touch one another, because no
other body is between them? Or that there can be no _vacuum_, because
_vacuum_ is nothing, or as they call it, _non ens_? Which is as
childish, as if one should reason thus; no man can fast, because to fast
is to eat nothing; but nothing cannot be eaten. _Continual, are any two
bodies that have a common part; and more than two are continual, when
every two, that are next to one another, are continual._

[Sidenote: The definition of motion. No motion intelligible but with
           time.]

10. MOTION _is a continual relinquishing of one place, and acquiring of
another_; and that place which is relinquished is commonly called the
_terminus a quo_, as that which is acquired is called the _terminus ad
quem_; I say a continual relinquishing, because no body, how little
soever, can totally and at once go out of its former place into another,
so, but that some part of it will be in a part of a place which is
common to both, namely, to the relinquished and the acquired places.
[Sidenote: A G B I E +-----+------+ : : : : +-----+------+ C H D K F]
For example, let any body be in the place A C B D; the same body cannot
come into the place B D E F, but it must first be in G H I K, whose part
G H B D is common to both the places A C B D, and G H I K, and whose
part B D I K, is common to both the places G H I K, and B D E F. Now it
cannot be conceived that any thing can be moved without time; for time
is, by the definition of it, a phantasm, that is, a conception of
motion; and, therefore, to conceive that any thing may be moved without
time, were to conceive motion without motion, which is impossible.

[Sidenote: What it is to be at rest, to have been moved, and to be
           moved. No motion to be conceived without the conception of
           past and future.]

11. _That is said to be at rest, which, during any time, is in one
place; and that to be moved, or to have been moved, which, whether it be
now at rest or moved, was formerly in another place than that which it
is now in._ From which definitions it may be inferred, first, that
_whatsoever is moved, has been moved_; for if it be still in the same
place in which it was formerly, it is at rest, that is, it is not moved,
by the definition of _rest_; but if it be in another place, it has been
moved, by the definition of _moved_. Secondly, that _what is moved, will
yet be moved_; for that which is moved, leaveth the place where it is,
and therefore will be in another place, and consequently will be moved
still. Thirdly, that _whatsoever is moved, is not in one place during
any time, how little soever that time be_; for by the definition of
rest, that which is in one place during any time, is at rest.

There is a certain sophism against motion, which seems to spring from
the not understanding of this last proposition. For they say, that, _if
any body be moved, it is moved either in the place where it is, or in
the place where it is not; both which are false; and therefore nothing
is moved_. But the falsity lies in the major proposition; for that which
is moved, is neither moved in the place where it is, nor in the place
where is not; but from the place where it is, to the place where it is
not. Indeed it cannot be denied but that whatsoever is moved, is moved
somewhere, that is, within some space; but then the place of that body
is not that whole space, but a part of it, as is said above in the
seventh article. From what is above demonstrated, namely, that
whatsoever is moved, has also been moved, and will be moved, this also
may be collected, that there can be no conception of motion, without
conceiving past and future time.

[Sidenote: A point, a line, superficies, and solid, what they are.]

12. Though there be no body which has not some magnitude, yet if, when
any body is moved, the magnitude of it be not at all considered, the way
it makes is called a _line_, or one single dimension; and the space,
through which it passeth, is called _length_; and the body itself, a
_point_; in which sense the earth is called a _point_, and the way of
its yearly revolution, the _ecliptic line_. But if a body, which is
moved, be considered as _long_, and be supposed to be so moved, as that
all the several parts of it be understood to make several lines, then
the way of every part of that body is called _breadth_, and the space
which is made is called _superficies_, consisting of two dimensions, one
whereof to every several part of the other is applied whole. Again, if a
body be considered as having _superficies_, and be understood to be so
moved, that all the several parts of it describe several lines, then the
way of every part of that body is called _thickness_ or _depth_, and the
space which is made is called _solid_, consisting of three dimensions,
any two whereof are applied whole to every several part of the third.

But if a body be considered as _solid_, then it is not possible that all
the several parts of it should describe several lines; for what way
soever it be moved, the way of the following part will fall into the way
of the part before it, so that the same solid will still be made which
the foremost superficies would have made by itself. And therefore there
can be no other dimension in any body, as it is a body, than the three
which I have now described; though, as it shall be shewed hereafter,
_velocity_, which is motion according to _length_, may, by being applied
to all the parts of a _solid_, make a magnitude of motion, consisting of
four dimensions; as the goodness of gold, computed in all the parts of
it, makes the price and value thereof.

[Sidenote: Equal, great, greater, and less, in bodies and magnitudes,
           what they are.]

13. _Bodies_, how many soever they be, that can fill every one the place
of every one, are said to be _equal_ every one to every other. Now, one
body may fill the same place which another body filleth, though it be
not of the same figure with that other body, if so be that it may be
understood to be reducible to the same figure, either by flexion or
transposition of the parts. And _one body is greater than another body,
when a part of that is equal to all this; and less, when all that is
equal to a part of this_. Also, _magnitudes_ are _equal_, or _greater_,
or _lesser_, than one another, for the same consideration, namely, when
the bodies, of which they are the magnitudes, are either _equal_, or
_greater_, or _less_, &c.

[Sidenote: One and the same body has always one and the same magnitude.]

14. One and the same body is always of one and the same magnitude. For
seeing a body and the magnitude and place thereof cannot be comprehended
in the mind otherwise than as they are coincident, if any body be
understood to be at rest, that is, to remain in the same place during
some time, and the magnitude thereof be in one part of that time
greater, and in another part less, that body's place, which is one and
the same, will be coincident sometimes with greater, sometimes with less
magnitude, that is, the same place will be greater and less than itself,
which is impossible. But there would be no need at all of demonstrating
a thing that is in itself so manifest, if there were not some, whose
opinion concerning bodies and their magnitudes is, that a body may exist
separated from its magnitude, and have greater or less magnitude
bestowed upon it, making use of this principle for the explication of
the nature of _rarum_ and _densum_.

[Sidenote: Velocity, what it is.]

15. Motion, in as much as a certain length may in a certain time be
transmitted by it, is called VELOCITY or _swiftness_: &c. For though
_swift_ be very often understood with relation to _slower_ or _less
swift_, as great is in respect of less, yet nevertheless, as magnitude
is by philosophers taken absolutely for extension, so also _velocity_ or
_swiftness_ may be put absolutely for motion according to length.

[Sidenote: Equal, greater, and less, in times, what they are.]

16. Many motions are said to be made in equal times, when every one of
them begins and ends together with some other motion, or if it had begun
together, would also have ended together with the same. For time, which
is a phantasm of motion, cannot be reckoned but by some exposed motion;
as in dials by the motion of the sun or of the hand; and if two or more
motions begin and end with this motion, they are said to be made in
equal times; from whence also it is easy to understand what it is to be
moved in greater or longer time, and in less time or not so long;
namely, that that is longer moved, which beginning with another, ends
later; or ending together, began sooner.

[Sidenote: Equal, greater, and less, in velocity, what.]

17. Motions are said to be equally swift, when equal lengths are
transmitted in equal times; and greater swiftness is that, wherein
greater length is passed in equal time, or equal length in less time.
Also that swiftness by which equal lengths are passed in equal parts of
time, is called _uniform_ swiftness or motion; and of motions _not
uniform_, such as become swifter or slower by equal increasings or
decreasings in equal parts of time, are said to be _accelerated_ or
_retarded uniformly_.

[Sidenote: Equal, greater, and less, in motion, what.]

18. But motion is said to be greater, less, and equal, not only in
regard of the length which is transmitted in a certain time, that is, in
regard of swiftness only, but of swiftness applied to every smallest
particle of magnitude; for when any body is moved, every part of it is
also moved; and supposing the parts to be halves, the motions of those
halves have their swiftness equal to one another, and severally equal to
that of the whole; but the motion of the whole is equal to those two
motions, either of which is of equal swiftness with it; and therefore it
is one thing for two motions to be equal to one another, and another
thing for them to be equally swift. And this is manifest in two horses
that draw abreast, where the motion of both the horses together is of
equal swiftness with the motion of either of them singly; but the motion
of both is greater than the motion of one of them, namely, double.
Wherefore _motions are said to be simply equal to one another, when the
swiftness of one, computed in every part of its magnitude, is equal to
the swiftness of the other computed also in every part of its magnitude:
and greater than one another, when the swiftness of one computed as
above, is greater than the swiftness of the other so computed; and less,
when less_. Besides, the magnitude of motion computed in this manner is
that which is commonly called FORCE.

[Sidenote: That which is at rest will always be at rest, except it be
           moved by some external thing.]

19. _Whatsoever is at rest, will always be at rest, unless there be some
other body besides it, which, by endeavouring to get into its place by
motion, suffers it no longer to remain at rest._ For suppose that some
finite body exist and be at rest, and that all space besides be empty;
if now this body begin to be moved, it will certainly be moved some way;
seeing therefore there was nothing in that body which did not dispose it
to rest, the reason why it is moved this way is in something out of it;
and in like manner, if it had been moved any other way, the reason of
motion that way had also been in something out of it; but seeing it was
supposed that nothing is out of it, the reason of its motion one way
would be the same with the reason of its motion every other way,
wherefore it would be moved alike all ways at once; which is impossible.

[Sidenote: That which is moved will always be moved, unless it be
           hindered by some external thing.]

In like manner, _whatsoever is moved, will always be moved, except there
be some other body besides it, which causeth it to rest_. For if we
suppose nothing to be without it, there will be no reason why it should
rest now, rather than at another time; wherefore its motion would cease
in every particle of time alike; which is not intelligible.

[Sidenote: Accidents are generated and destroyed, but bodies not so.]

20. When we say a living creature, a tree, or any other specified body
is _generated_ or _destroyed_, it is not to be so understood as if there
were made a body of that which is not-body, or not a body of a body, but
of a living creature not a living creature, of a tree not a tree, &c.
that is, that those accidents for which we call one thing a living
creature, another thing a tree, and another by some other name, are
generated and destroyed; and that therefore the same names are not to be
given to them now, which were given them before. But that magnitude for
which we give to any thing the name of body is neither generated nor
destroyed. For though we may feign in our mind that a point may swell to
a huge bulk, and that this may again contract itself to a point; that
is, though we may imagine something to arise where before was nothing,
and nothing to be there where before was something, yet we cannot
comprehend in our mind how this may possibly be done in nature. And
therefore philosophers, who tie themselves to natural reason, suppose
that a body can neither be generated nor destroyed, but only that it may
appear otherwise than it did to us, that is, under different _species_,
and consequently be called by other and other names; so that that which
is now called man, may at another time have the name of not-man; but
that which is once called body, can never be called not-body. But it is
manifest, that all other accidents besides magnitude or extension may be
generated and destroyed; as when a white thing is made black, the
whiteness that was in it perisheth, and the blackness that was not in it
is now generated; and therefore bodies, and the accidents under which
they appear diversely, have this difference, that bodies are things, and
not generated; accidents are generated, and not things.

[Sidenote: An accident cannot depart from its subject]

21. And therefore, when any thing appears otherwise than it did by
reason of other and other accidents, it is not to be thought that an
accident goes out of one subject into another, (for they are not, as I
said above, in their subjects as a part in the whole, or as a contained
thing in that which contains it, or as a master of a family in his
house,) but that one accident perisheth, and another is generated. For
example, when the hand, being moved, moves the pen, motion does not go
out of the hand into the pen; for so the writing might be continued
though the hand stood still; but a new motion is generated in the pen,
and is the pen's motion.

[Sidenote: Nor be moved.]

22. And therefore also it is improper to say, an accident is moved; as
when, instead of saying, _figure is an accident of a body carried away_,
we say, _a body carries away its figure_.

[Sidenote: Essence, form, and matter, what they are.]

23. Now that accident for which we give a certain name to any body, or
the accident which denominates its subject, is commonly called the
ESSENCE thereof; as rationality is the essence of a man; whiteness, of
any white thing, and extension the essence of a body. And the same
essence, in as much as it is generated, is called the FORM. Again, a
body, in respect of any accident, is called the SUBJECT, and in respect
of the form it is called the MATTER.

Also, the production or perishing of any accident makes its subject be
said _to be changed_; only the production or perishing of form makes it
be said it is _generated_ or _destroyed_; but in all generation and
mutation, the name of _matter_ still remains. For a table made of wood
is not only wooden, but wood; and a statue of brass is brass as well as
brazen; though Aristotle, in his _Metaphysics_, says, that whatsoever is
made of any thing ought not to be called ἐκεινὸ, but ἐκέινινον; as that
which is made of wood, not ξύλον, but ξύλινον, that is, not wood, but
wooden.

[Sidenote: First matter, what.]

24. And as for that matter which is common to all things, and which
philosophers, following Aristotle, usually call _materia prima_, that
is, _first matter_, it is not any body distinct from all other bodies,
nor is it one of them. What then is it? A mere name; yet a name which is
not of vain use; for it signifies a conception of body without the
consideration of any form or other accident except only magnitude or
extension, and aptness to receive form and other accident. So that
whensoever we have use of the name _body in general_, if we use that of
_materia prima_, we do well. For as when a man not knowing which was
first, water or ice, would find out which of the two were the matter of
both, he would be fain to suppose some third matter which were neither
of these two; so he that would find out what is the matter of all
things, ought to suppose such as is not the matter of anything that
exists. Wherefore _materia prima_ is nothing; and therefore they do not
attribute to it either form or any other accident besides quantity;
whereas all singular things have their forms and accidents certain.

_Materia prima_, therefore, is body in general, that is, body considered
universally, not as having neither form nor any accident, but in which
no form nor any other accident but quantity are at all considered, that
is, they are not drawn into argumentation.

[Sidenote: That the whole is greater than any part thereof, why
           demonstrated.]

25. From what has been said, those axioms may be demonstrated, which are
assumed by Euclid in the beginning of his first element, about the
equality and inequality of magnitudes; of which, omitting the rest, I
will here demonstrate only this one, _the whole is greater than any part
thereof_; to the end that the reader may know that those axioms are not
indemonstrable, and therefore not principles of demonstration; and from
hence learn to be wary how he admits any thing for a principle, which is
not at least as evident as these are. _Greater_ is defined to be that,
whose part is equal to the whole of another. Now if we suppose any whole
to be A, and a part of it to be B; seeing the whole B is equal to
itself, and the same B is a part of A; therefore a part of A will be
equal to the whole B. Wherefore, by the definition above, A is greater
than B; which was to be proved.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER IX.

                          OF CAUSE AND EFFECT.

1. Action and passion, what they are.—2. Action and passion mediate and
    immediate.—3. Cause simply taken. Cause without which no effect
    follows, or cause necessary by supposition.—4. Cause efficient and
    material.—5. An entire cause is always sufficient to produce its
    effect. At the same instant that the cause is entire, the effect is
    produced. Every effect has a necessary cause.—6. The generation of
    effects is continual. What is the beginning in causation.—7. No
    cause of motion but in a body contiguous and moved.—8. The same
    agents and patients, if alike disposed, produce like effects though
    at different times.—9. All mutation is motion.—10. Contingent
    accidents, what they are.


[Sidenote: Action and passion, what they are.]

1. A body is said to work upon or _act_, that is to say, _do_ something
to another body, when it either generates or destroys some accident in
it: and the body in which an accident is generated or destroyed is said
to _suffer_, that is, to have something _done_ to it by another body; as
when one body by putting forwards another body generates motion in it,
it is called the AGENT; and the body in which motion is so generated, is
called the PATIENT; so fire that warms the hand is the _agent_, and the
hand, which is warmed, is the _patient_. That accident, which is
generated in the patient, is called the EFFECT.

[Sidenote: Action and passion, mediate, and immediate.]

2. When an agent and patient are contiguous to one another, their action
and passion are then said to be _immediate_, otherwise, _mediate_; and
when another body, lying betwixt the agent and patient, is contiguous to
them both, it is then itself both an agent and a patient; an agent in
respect of the body next after it, upon which it works, and a patient in
respect of the body next before it, from which it suffers. Also, if many
bodies be so ordered that every two which are next to one another be
contiguous, then all those that are betwixt the first and the last are
both agents and patients, and the first is an agent only, and the last a
patient only.

[Sidenote: Cause simply taken.]

3. An agent is understood to _produce_ its determined or certain effect
in the patient, according to some certain accident or accidents, with
which both it and the patient are affected; that is to say, the agent
hath its effect precisely such, not because it is a body, but because
such a body, or so moved. For otherwise all agents, seeing they are all
bodies alike, would produce like effects in all patients. And therefore
the fire, for example, does not warm, because it is a body, but because
it is hot; nor does one body put forward another body because it is a
body, but because it is moved into the place of that other body.
[Sidenote: Cause without which no effect follows, or cause necessary by
supposition.]The cause, therefore, of all effects consists in certain
accidents both in the agents and in the patients; which when they are
all present, the effect is produced; but if any one of them be wanting,
it is not produced; and that accident either of the agent or patient,
without which the effect cannot be produced, is called _causa sine qua
non_, or _cause necessary by supposition_, as also the _cause requisite
for the production of the effect_. But a CAUSE simply, or _an entire
cause, is the aggregate of all the accidents both of the agents how many
soever they be, and of the patient, put together; which when they are
all supposed to be present, it cannot be understood but that the effect
is produced at the same instant; and if any one of them be wanting, it
cannot be understood but that the effect is not produced_.

[Sidenote: Cause efficient, and material.]

4. The aggregate of accidents in the agent or agents, requisite for the
production of the effect, the effect being produced, is called the
_efficient cause_ thereof; and the aggregate of accidents in the
patient, the effect being produced, is usually called the _material
cause_; I say the effect being produced; for where there is no effect,
there can be no cause; for nothing can be called a cause, where there is
nothing that can be called an effect. But the efficient and material
causes are both but partial causes, or parts of that cause, which in the
next precedent article I called an entire cause. And from hence it is
manifest, that the effect we expect, though the agents be not defective
on their part, may nevertheless be frustrated by a defect in the
patient; and when the patient is sufficient, by a defect in the agents.

[Sidenote: An entire cause is always sufficient to produce its effect.]

5. An entire cause is always sufficient for the production of its
effect, if the effect be at all possible. For let any effect whatsoever
be propounded to be produced; if the same be produced, it is manifest
that the cause which produced it was a sufficient cause; but if it be
not produced, and yet be possible, it is evident that something was
wanting either in some agent, or in the patient, without which it could
not be produced; that is, that some accident was wanting which was
requisite for its production; and therefore, that cause was not
_entire_, which is contrary to what was supposed.

[Sidenote: At the same instant that the cause is entire, the effect is
           produced.]

It follows also from hence, that in whatsoever instant the cause is
entire, in the same instant the effect is produced. For if it be not
produced, something is still wanting, which is requisite for the
production of it; and therefore the cause was not entire, as was
supposed.

[Sidenote: Every effect has a necessary cause.]

And seeing a necessary cause is defined to be that, which being
supposed, the effect cannot but follow; this also may be collected, that
whatsoever effect is produced at any time, the same is produced by a
necessary cause. For whatsoever is produced, in as much as it is
produced, had an entire cause, that is, had all those things, which
being supposed, it cannot be understood but that the effect follows;
that is, it had a necessary cause. And in the same manner it may be
shewn, that whatsoever effects are hereafter to be produced, shall have
a necessary cause; so that all the effects that have been, or shall be
produced, have their necessity in things antecedent.

[Sidenote: The generation of effects is continual. What is the beginning
           in causation.]

6. And from this, that whensoever the cause is entire, the effect is
produced in the same instant, it is manifest that causation and the
production of effects consist in a certain continual progress; so that
as there is a continual mutation in the agent or agents, by the working
of other agents upon them, so also the patient, upon which they work, is
continually altered and changed. For example: as the heat of the fire
increases more and more, so also the effects thereof, namely, the heat
of such bodies as are next to it, and again, of such other bodies as are
next to them, increase more and more accordingly; which is already no
little argument that all mutation consists in motion only; the truth
whereof shall be further demonstrated in the ninth article. But in this
progress of causation, that is, of action and passion, if any man
comprehend in his imagination a part thereof, and divide the same into
parts, the first part or beginning of it cannot be considered otherwise
than as action or cause; for, if it should be considered as effect or
passion, then it would be necessary to consider something before it, for
its cause or action; which cannot be, for nothing can be before the
beginning. And in like manner, the last part is considered only as
effect; for it cannot be called cause, if nothing follow it; but after
the last, nothing follows. And from hence it is, that in all action the
beginning and cause are taken for the same thing. But every one of the
intermediate parts are both action and passion, and cause and effect,
according as they are compared with the antecedent or subsequent part.

[Sidenote: No cause of motion but in a body contiguous and moved.]

7. There can be no cause of motion, except in a body contiguous and
moved. For let there be any two bodies which are not contiguous, and
betwixt which the intermediate space is empty, or, if filled, filled
with another body which is at rest; and let one of the propounded bodies
be supposed to be at rest; I say it shall always be at rest. For if it
shall be moved, the cause of that motion, by the 8th chapter, article
19, will be some external body; and, therefore, if between it and that
external body there be nothing but empty space, then whatsoever the
disposition be of that external body or of the patient itself, yet if it
be supposed to be now at rest, we may conceive it will continue so till
it be touched by some other body. But seeing cause, by the definition,
is the aggregate of all such accidents, which being supposed to be
present, it cannot be conceived but that the effect will follow, those
accidents, which are either in external bodies, or in the patient
itself, cannot be the cause of future motion. And in like manner, seeing
we may conceive that whatsoever is at rest will still be at rest, though
it be touched by some other body, except that other body be moved;
therefore in a contiguous body, which is at rest, there can be no cause
of motion. Wherefore there is no cause of motion in any body, except it
be contiguous and moved.

The same reason may serve to prove that whatsoever is moved, will always
be moved on in the same way and with the same velocity, except it be
hindered by some other contiguous and moved body; and consequently that
no bodies, either when they are at rest, or when there is an
interposition of vacuum, can generate or extinguish or lessen motion in
other bodies. There is one that has written that things moved are more
resisted by things at rest, than by things contrarily moved; for this
reason, that he conceived motion not to be so contrary to motion as
rest. That which deceived him was, that the words _rest_ and _motion_
are but contradictory names; whereas motion, indeed, is not resisted by
rest, but by contrary motion.

[Sidenote: The same agents and patients, if alike disposed, produce like
           effects, though at different times.]

8. But if a body work upon another body at one time, and afterwards the
same body work upon the same body at another time, so that both the
agent and patient, and all their parts, be in all things as they were;
and there be no difference, except only in time, that is, that one
action be former, the other later in time; it is manifest of itself,
that the effects will be equal and like, as not differing in anything
besides time. And as effects themselves proceed from their causes, so
the diversity of them depends upon the diversity of their causes also.

[Sidenote: All mutation is motion.]

9. This being true, it is necessary that mutation can be nothing else
but motion of the parts of that body which is changed. For first, we do
not say anything is changed, but that which appears to our senses
otherwise than it appeared formerly. Secondly, both those appearances
are effects produced in the sentient; and, therefore, if they be
different, it is necessary, by the preceding article, that either some
part of the agent, which was formerly at rest, is now moved, and so the
mutation consists in this motion; or some part, which was formerly
moved, is now otherwise moved, and so also the mutation consists in this
new motion; or which, being formerly moved, is now at rest, which, as I
have shewn above, cannot come to pass without motion; and so again,
mutation is motion; or lastly, it happens in some of these manners to
the patient, or some of its parts; so that mutation, howsoever it be
made, will consist in the motion of the parts, either of the body which
is perceived, or of the sentient body, or of both. Mutation therefore is
motion, namely, of the parts either of the agent or of the patient;
which was to be demonstrated. And to this it is consequent, that rest
cannot be the cause of anything, nor can any action proceed from it;
seeing neither motion nor mutation can be caused by it.

[Sidenote: Contingent accidents.]

10. Accidents, in respect of other accidents which precede them, or are
before them in time, and upon which they do not depend as upon their
causes, are called _contingent_ accidents; I say, in respect of those
accidents by which they are not generated; for, in respect of their
causes, all things come to pass with equal necessity; for otherwise they
would have no causes at all; which, of things generated, is not
intelligible.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER X.

                           OF POWER AND ACT.

1. Power and cause are the same thing.—2. An act is produced at the same
    instant in which the power is plenary.—3. Active and passive power
    are parts only of plenary power.—4. An act, when said to be
    possible.—5. An act necessary and contingent, what.—6. Active power
    consists in motion.—7. Cause, formal and final, what they are.


[Sidenote: Power and cause are the same thing.]

1. Correspondent to _cause_ and _effect_, are POWER and ACT; nay, those
and these are the same things; though, for divers considerations, they
have divers names. For whensoever any agent has all those accidents
which are necessarily requisite for the production of some effect in the
patient, then we say that agent has _power_ to produce that effect, if
it be applied to a patient. But, as I have shewn in the precedent
chapter, those accidents constitute the efficient cause; and therefore
the same accidents, which constitute the efficient cause, constitute
also the _power_ of the agent. Wherefore the _power of the agent_ and
the _efficient cause_ are the same thing. But they are considered with
this difference, that _cause_ is so called in respect of the effect
already produced, and power in respect of the same effect to be produced
hereafter; so that _cause_ respects the past, _power_ the future time.
Also, the _power of the agent_ is that which is commonly called _active
power_.

In like manner, whensoever any patient has all those accidents which it
is requisite it should have, for the production of some effect in it, we
say it is in the _power_ of that patient to produce that effect, if it
be applied to a fitting agent. But those accidents, as is defined in the
precedent chapter, constitute the material cause; and therefore the
_power of the patient_, commonly called _passive power_, and _material
cause_, are the same thing; but with this different consideration, that
in cause the past time, and in power the future, is respected. Wherefore
the power of the agent and patient together, which may be called entire
or _plenary power_, is the same thing with _entire cause_; for they both
consist in the sum or aggregate of all the accidents, as well in the
agent as in the patient, which are requisite for the production of the
effect. Lastly, as the accident produced is, in respect of the cause,
called an effect, so in respect of the power, it is called an _act_.

[Sidenote: An act is produced at the same instant in which the power is
           plenary.]

2. As therefore the effect is produced in the same instant in which the
cause is entire, so also every act that may be produced, is produced in
the same instant in which the power is plenary. And as there can be no
effect but from a sufficient and necessary cause, so also no act can be
produced but by sufficient power, or that power by which it could not
but be produced.

[Sidenote: Active and passive power are parts only of plenary power.]

3. And as it is manifest, as I have shewn, that the efficient and
material causes are severally and by themselves parts only of an entire
cause, and cannot produce any effect but by being joined together, so
also power, active and passive, are parts only of plenary and entire
power; nor, except they be joined, can any act proceed from them; and
therefore these powers, as I said in the first article, are but
conditional, namely, _the agent has power, if it be applied to a
patient; and the patient has power, if it be applied to an agent_;
otherwise neither of them have power, nor can the accidents, which are
in them severally, be properly called powers; nor any action be said to
be possible for the power of the agent alone or of the patient alone.

[Sidenote: An act, when said to be possible.]

4. For that is an impossible act, for the production of which there is
no power plenary. For seeing plenary power is that in which all things
concur, which are requisite for the production of an act, if the power
shall never be plenary, there will always be wanting some of those
things, without which the act cannot be produced; wherefore that act
shall never be produced; that is, that act is IMPOSSIBLE: and every act,
which is not impossible, is POSSIBLE. Every act, therefore, which is
possible, shall at some time be produced; for if it shall never be
produced, then those things shall never concur which are requisite for
the production of it; wherefore that act is _impossible_, by the
definition; which is contrary to what was supposed.

[Sidenote: An act necessary and contingent, what.]

5. A _necessary act_ is that, the production whereof it is impossible to
hinder; and therefore every act, that shall be produced, shall
necessarily be produced; for, that it shall not be produced, is
impossible; because, as is already demonstrated, every possible act
shall at some time be produced; nay, this proposition, _what shall be,
shall be_, is as necessary a proposition as this, _a man is a man_.

But here, perhaps, some man may ask whether those future things, which
are commonly called _contingents_, are necessary. I say, therefore, that
generally all contingents have their necessary causes, as is shewn in
the preceding chapter; but are called contingents in respect of other
events, upon which they do not depend; as the rain, which shall be
tomorrow, shall be necessary, that is, from necessary causes; but we
think and say it happens by chance, because we do not yet perceive the
causes thereof, though they exist now; for men commonly call that
_casual_ or _contingent_, whereof they do not perceive the necessary
cause; and in the same manner they used to speak of things past, when
not knowing whether a thing be done or no, they say it is possible it
never was done.

Wherefore, all propositions concerning future things, contingent or not
contingent, as this, _it will rain tomorrow_, or this, _tomorrow the sun
will rise_, are either necessarily true, or necessarily false; but we
call them contingent, because we do not yet know whether they be true or
false; whereas their verity depends not upon our knowledge, but upon the
foregoing of their causes. But there are some, who though they confess
this whole proposition, _tomorrow it will either rain, or not rain_, to
be true, yet they will not acknowledge the parts of it, as, _tomorrow it
will rain_, or, _tomorrow it will not rain_, to be either of them true
by itself; because they say neither this nor that is true
_determinately_. But what is this _determinately true_, but true upon
our knowledge, or evidently true? And therefore they say no more but
that it is not yet known whether it be true or no; but they say it more
obscurely, and darken the evidence of the truth with the same words,
with which they endeavour to hide their own ignorance.

[Sidenote: Active power consists in motion.]

6. In the 9th article of the preceding chapter, I have shewn that the
efficient cause of all motion and mutation consists in the motion of the
agent, or agents; and in the first article of this chapter, that the
power of the agent is the same thing with the efficient cause. From
whence it may be understood, that all active power consists in motion
also; and that power is not a certain accident, which differs from all
acts, but is, indeed, an act, namely, motion, which is therefore called
power, because another act shall be produced by it afterwards. For
example, if of three bodies the first put forward the second, and this
the third, the motion of the second, in respect of the first which
produceth it, is the act of the second body; but, in respect of the
third, it is the active power of the same second body.

[Sidenote: Cause, formal and final, what they are.]

7. The writers of metaphysics reckon up two other causes besides the
_efficient_ and _material_, namely, the ESSENCE, which some call the
_formal cause_, and the END, or _final cause_; both which are
nevertheless efficient causes. For when it is said the essence of a
thing is the cause thereof, _as to be rational is the cause of man_, it
is not intelligible; for it is all one, as if it were said, _to be a man
is the cause of man_; which is not well said. And yet the knowledge of
the _essence_ of anything, is the cause of the knowledge of the thing
itself; for, if I first know that a thing is _rational_, I know from
thence, that the same is _man_; but this is no other than an efficient
cause. A _final cause_ has no place but in such things as have sense and
will; and this also I shall prove hereafter to be an efficient cause.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XI.

                      OF IDENTITY AND DIFFERENCE.

1. What it is for one thing to differ from another.—2. To differ in
    number, magnitude, species, and genus, what.—3. What is relation,
    proportion, and relatives.—4. Proportionals, what.—5. The proportion
    of magnitudes to one another, wherein it consists.—6. Relation is no
    new accident, but one of those that were in the relative before the
    relation or comparison was made. Also the causes of accidents in the
    correlatives, are the cause of relation.—7. Of the beginning of
    individuation.


[Sidenote: What it is for one thing to differ from another.]

1. Hitherto I have spoken of body simply, and accidents common to all
bodies, as _magnitude_, _motion_, _rest_, _action_, _passion_, _power_,
_possible_, _&c._; and I should now descend to those accidents by which
one body is distinguished from another, but that it is first to be
declared what it is to be _distinct_ and _not distinct_, namely, what
are the SAME and DIFFERENT; for this also is common to all bodies, that
they may be distinguished and differenced from one another. Now, two
bodies are said to _differ_ from one another, when something may be said
of one of them, which cannot be said of the other at the same time.

[Sidenote: To differ in number, magnitude, species, and genus, what.]

2. And, first of all, it is manifest that no two bodies are the _same_;
for seeing they are two, they are in two places at the same time; as
that, which is the _same_, is at the same time in one and the same
place. All bodies therefore differ from one another in _number_, namely,
as one and another; so that the _same_ and _different in number_, are
names opposed to one another by contradiction.

In _magnitude_ bodies differ when one is greater than another, as _a
cubit long_, and _two cubits long_, of _two pound weight_, and of _three
pound weight_. And to these, _equals_ are opposed.

Bodies, which differ more than in magnitude, are called _unlike_; and
those, which differ only in magnitude, _like_. Also, of unlike bodies,
some are said to differ in the _species_, others in the _genus_; in the
_species_, when their difference is perceived by one and the same sense,
as _white_ and _black_; and in the _genus_, when their difference is not
perceived but by divers senses, as _white_ and _hot_.

[Sidenote: What is relation, proportion, and relatives.]

3. And the _likeness_, or _unlikeness_, _equality_, or _inequality_ of
one body to another, is called their RELATION; and the bodies themselves
_relatives_ or _correlatives_; _Aristotle_ calls them τὰ πρὸς τί; the
first whereof is usually named the _antecedent_, and the second the
_consequent_; and the _relation_ of the antecedent to the consequent,
according to magnitude, namely, the equality, the excess or defect
thereof, is called the PROPORTION of the antecedent to the consequent;
so that _proportion_ is nothing but the equality or inequality of the
magnitude of the antecedent compared to the magnitude of the consequent
by their difference only, or compared also with their difference. For
example, the _proportion_ of three to two consists only in this, that
three _exceeds_ two by unity; and the proportion of two to five in this,
that two, compared with five, is _deficient_ of it by three, either
simply, or compared with the numbers different; and therefore in the
proportion of unequals, the proportion of the less to the greater, is
called DEFECT; and that of the greater to the less, EXCESS.

[Sidenote: Proportionals, what.]

4. Besides, of unequals, some are more, some less, and some equally
unequal; so that there is _proportion of proportions_, as well as of
_magnitudes_; namely, where two unequals have relation to two other
unequals; as, when the inequality which is between 2 and 3, is compared
with the inequality which is between 4 and 5. In which comparison there
are always four magnitudes; or, which is all one, if there be but three,
the middlemost is twice numbered; and if the proportion of the first to
the second, be equal to the proportion of the third to the fourth, then
the four are said to be _proportionals_; otherwise they are not
proportionals.

[Sidenote: The proportion of magnitudes to one another, wherein it
           consists.]

5. The proportion of the antecedent to the consequent consists in their
difference, not only simply taken, but also as compared with one of the
relatives; that is, either in that part of the greater, by which it
exceeds the less, or in the remainder, after the less is taken out of
the greater; as the proportion of two to five consists in the three by
which five exceeds two, not in three simply only, but also as compared
with five or two. For though there be the same difference between two
and five, which is between nine and twelve, namely three, yet there is
not the same inequality; and therefore the proportion of two to five is
not in all relation the same with that of nine to twelve, but only in
that which is called arithmetical.

[Sidenote: Relation is no new accident, but one of those that were in
           the relative, before the relation or comparison was made.
           Also the causes of accidents in correlatives are the cause of
           relation.]

6. But we must not so think of relation, as if it were an accident
differing from all the other accidents of the relative; but one of them,
namely, that by which the comparison is made. For example, the likeness
of one _white_ to another _white_, or its unlikeness to _black_, is the
same accident with its _whiteness_; and _equality_ and _inequality_, the
same accident with the _magnitude_ of the thing compared, though under
another name: for that which is called _white_ or _great_, when it is
not compared with something else, the same when it is compared, is
called _like_ or _unlike_, _equal_ or _unequal_. And from this it
follows that the causes of the accidents, which are in relatives, are
the causes also of _likeness_, _unlikeness_, _equality_ and
_inequality_; namely, that he, that makes two unequal bodies, makes also
their inequality; and he, that makes a rule and an action, makes also,
if the action be congruous to the rule, their congruity; if incongruous,
their incongruity. And thus much concerning _comparison_ of one body
with another.

[Sidenote: Of the beginning of individuation.]

7. But the same body may at different times be compared with itself. And
from hence springs a great controversy among philosophers about the
_beginning of individuation_, namely, in what sense it may be conceived
that a body is at one time the same, at another time not the same it was
formerly. For example, whether a man grown old be the same man he was
whilst he was young, or another man; or whether a city be in different
ages the same, or another city. Some place _individuity_ in the unity of
_matter_; others, in the unity of _form_; and one says it consists in
the unity of the _aggregate of all the accidents together_. For
_matter_, it is pleaded that a lump of wax, whether it be spherical or
cubical, is the same wax, because the same matter. For _form_, that when
a man is grown from an infant to be an old man, though his matter be
changed, yet he is still the same numerical man; for that _identity_
which cannot be attributed to the matter, ought probably to be ascribed
to the form. For the _aggregate of accidents_, no instance can be made;
but because, when any new accident is generated, a new name is commonly
imposed on the thing, therefore he, that assigned this cause of
_individuity_, thought the thing itself also was become another thing.
According to the first opinion, he that sins, and he that is punished,
should not be the same man, by reason of the perpetual flux and change
of man's body; nor should the city, which makes laws in one age and
abrogates them in another, be the same city; which were to confound all
civil rights. According to the second opinion, two bodies existing both
at once, would be one and the same numerical body. For if, for example,
that ship of Theseus, concerning the difference whereof made by
continual reparation in taking out the old planks and putting in new,
the sophisters of Athens were wont to dispute, were, after all the
planks were changed, the same numerical ship it was at the beginning;
and if some man had kept the old planks as they were taken out, and by
putting them afterwards together in the same order, had again made a
ship of them, this, without doubt, had also been the same numerical ship
with that which was at the beginning; and so there would have been two
ships numerically the same, which is absurd. But, according to the third
opinion, nothing would be the same it was; so that a man standing would
not be the same he was sitting; nor the water, which is in the vessel,
the same with that which is poured out of it. Wherefore the beginning of
_individuation_ is not always to be taken either from matter alone, or
from form alone.

But we must consider by what name anything is called, when we inquire
concerning the _identity_ of it. For it is one thing to ask concerning
Socrates, whether he be the same man, and another to ask whether he be
the same body; for his body, when he is old, cannot be the same it was
when he was an infant, by reason of the difference of magnitude; for one
body has always one and the same magnitude; yet, nevertheless, he may be
the same man. And therefore, whensoever the name, by which it is asked
whether a thing be the same it was, is given it for the matter only,
then, if the matter be the same, the thing also is _individually_ the
same; as the water, which was in the sea, is the same which is
afterwards in the cloud; and any body is the same, whether the parts of
it be put together, or dispersed; or whether it be congealed, or
dissolved. Also, if the name be given for such form as is the beginning
of motion, then, as long as that motion remains, it will be the same
_individual_ thing; as that man will be always the same, whose actions
and thoughts proceed all from the same beginning of motion, namely, that
which was in his generation; and that will be the same river which flows
from one and the same fountain, whether the same water, or other water,
or something else than water, flow from thence; and that the same city,
whose acts proceed continually from the same institution, whether the
men be the same or no. Lastly, if the name be given for some accident,
then the _identity_ of the thing will depend upon the matter; for, by
the taking away and supplying of matter, the accidents that were, are
destroyed, and other new ones are generated, which cannot be the same
numerically; so that a ship, which signifies matter so figured, will be
the same as long as the matter remains the same; but if no part of the
matter be the same, then it is numerically another ship; and if part of
the matter remain and part be changed, then the ship will be partly the
same, and partly not the same.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XII.

                              OF QUANTITY.

1. The definition of quantity.—2. The exposition of quantity, what it
    is.—3. How line, superficies, and solid, are exposed.—4. How time is
    exposed.—5. How number is exposed.—6. How velocity is exposed.—7.
    How weight is exposed.—8. How the proportion of magnitudes is
    exposed.—9. How the proportion of times and velocities is exposed.


[Sidenote: Definition of quantity.]

1. What and how manifold _dimension_ is, has been said in the 8th
chapter, namely, that there are three dimensions, line or length,
superficies, and solid; every one of which, if it be determined, that
is, if the limits of it be made known, is commonly called _quantity_;
for by _quantity_ all men understand that which is signified by that
word, by which answer is made to the question, _How much is it?_
Whensoever, therefore, it is asked, for example, _How long is the
journey?_ it is not answered indefinitely, _length_; nor, when it is
asked, _How big is the field?_ is it answered indefinitely,
_superficies_; nor, if a man ask, _How great is the bulk?_ indefinitely,
_solid_: but it is answered determinately, the journey is a hundred
miles; the field is a hundred acres; the bulk is a hundred cubical feet;
or at least in some such manner, that the magnitude of the thing
enquired after may by certain limits be comprehended in the mind.
QUANTITY, therefore, cannot otherwise be defined, than to be _a
dimension determined_, or _a dimension, whose limits are set out, either
by their place, or by some comparison_.

[Sidenote: The exposition of quantity, what it is.]

2. And _quantity_ is determined two ways; one, by the sense, when some
sensible object is set before it; as when a line, a superficies or
solid, of a foot or cubit, marked out in some matter, is objected to the
eyes; which way of determining, is called _exposition_, and the quantity
so known is called _exposed quantity_; the other by memory, that is, by
comparison with some exposed quantity. In the first manner, when it is
asked of what quantity a thing is, it is answered, of such quantity as
you see exposed. In the second manner, answer cannot be made but by
comparison with some exposed quantity; for if it be asked, how long is
the way? the answer is, so many thousand paces; that is, by comparing
the way with a pace, or some other measure, determined and known by
exposition; or the quantity of it is to some other quantity known by
exposition, as the diameter of a square is to the side of the same, or
by some other the like means. But it is to be understood, that the
quantity exposed must be some standing or permanent thing, such as is
marked out in consistent or durable matter; or at least something which
is revocable to sense; for otherwise no comparison can be made by it.
Seeing, therefore, by what has been said in the next preceding chapter,
comparison of one magnitude with another is the same thing with
proportion; it is manifest, that quantity determined in the second
manner is nothing else but the proportion of a dimension not exposed to
another which is exposed; that is, the comparison of the equality or
inequality thereof with an exposed quantity.

[Sidenote: How line, superficies, and solids, are exposed.]

3. _Lines_, _superficies_, and _solids_, are exposed, first, by
_motion_, in such manner as in the 8th chapter I have said they are
generated; but so as that the marks of such motion be permanent; as when
they are designed upon some matter, as a line upon paper; or graven in
some durable matter. Secondly, by _apposition_; as when one line or
length is applied to another line or length, one breadth to another
breadth, and one thickness to another thickness; which is as much as to
describe a line by points, a superficies by lines, and a solid by
superficies; saving that by points in this place are to be understood
very short lines; and, by superficies, very thin solids. Thirdly, lines
and superficies may be exposed by _section_, namely, a line may be made
by cutting an exposed superficies; and a superficies, by the cutting of
an exposed solid.

[Sidenote: How time is exposed.]

4. _Time_ is exposed, not only by the exposition of a line, but also of
some moveable thing, which is moved uniformly upon that line, or at
least is supposed so to be moved. For, seeing time is an idea of motion,
in which we consider former and latter, that is succession, it is not
sufficient for the exposition of time that a line be described; but we
must also have in our mind an imagination of some moveable thing passing
over that line; and the motion of it must be uniform, that time may be
divided and compounded as often as there shall be need. And, therefore,
when philosophers, in their demonstrations, draw a line, and say, _Let
that line be time_, it is to be understood as if they said, _Let the
conception of uniform motion upon that line, be time_. For though the
circles in dials be lines, yet they are not of themselves sufficient to
note time by, except also there be, or be supposed to be, a motion of
the shadow or the hand.

[Sidenote: How number is exposed.]

5. _Number_ is exposed, either by the exposition of points, or of the
names of number, _one_, _two_, _three_, _&c._; and those points must not
be contiguous, so as that they cannot be distinguished by notes, but
they must be so placed that they may be _discerned_ one from another;
for, from this it is, that number is called _discreet quantity_, whereas
all quantity, which is designed by motion, is called _continual
quantity_. But that number may be exposed by the names of number, it is
necessary that they be recited by heart and in order, as one, two,
three, &c.; for by saying one, one, one, and so forward, we know not
what number we are at beyond two or three; which also appear to us in
this manner, not as number, but as figure.

[Sidenote: How velocity is exposed.]

6. For the exposition of _velocity_, which, by the definition thereof,
is a motion which, in a certain time, passeth over a certain space, it
is requisite, not only that time be exposed, but that there be also
exposed that space which is transmitted by the body, whose velocity we
would determine; and that a body be understood to be moved in that space
also; so that there must be exposed two lines, upon one of which uniform
motion must be understood to be made, that the time may be determined;
and, upon the other, the velocity is to be computed. As if we would
expose the velocity of the we would expose the velocity of the body A,
we draw two lines A B and C D, and place a body in C also; which done,
we say the velocity of the body A is so great, that it passeth over the
line A B in the same time in which the body C passeth over the line C D
with uniform motion.

                                 A    B
                                 ------
                                 C    D
                                 ------

[Sidenote: How weight is exposed.]

7. _Weight_ is exposed by any heavy body, of what matter soever, so it
be always alike heavy.

[Sidenote: How the proportion of magnitudes is exposed.]

8. The _proportion_ of two magnitudes is then exposed, when the
magnitudes themselves are exposed, namely, the proportion of equality,
when the magnitudes are equal; and of inequality, when they are unequal.
For seeing, by the 5th article of the preceding chapter, the proportion
of two unequal magnitudes consists in their difference, compared with
either of them; and when two unequal magnitudes are exposed, their
difference is also exposed; it follows, that when magnitudes, which have
proportion to one another, are exposed, their proportion also is exposed
with them; and, in like manner, the proportion of equals, which consists
in this, that there is no difference of magnitude betwixt them, is
exposed at the same time when the equal magnitudes themselves are
exposed. For example, if the exposed lines A B and C D be equal, the
proportion of equality is exposed in them; and if the exposed lines, E F
and E G be unequal, the proportion which E F has to E G, and that which
E G has to E F are also exposed in them; for not only the lines
themselves, but also their difference, G F, is exposed. The proportion
of unequals is quantity; for the difference, G F, in which it consists,
is quantity. But the proportion of equality is not quantity; because,
between equals, there is no difference; nor is one equality greater than
another, as one inequality is greater than another inequality.

                                A     B
                                -------
                                C     D
                                -------
                                E  F  F
                                -------

[Sidenote: How the proportion of times and velocities is exposed.]

The proportion of two _times_, or of two _uniform velocities_, is then
exposed, when two lines are exposed by which two bodies are understood
to be moved uniformly; and therefore the same two lines serve to exhibit
both their own proportion, and that of the times and velocities,
according as they are considered to be exposed for the magnitudes
themselves, or for the times or velocities. For let the two lines A and
B be exposed; their proportion therefore (by the last foregoing article)
is exposed; and if they be considered as drawn with equal and uniform
velocity, then, seeing their times are greater, or equal, or less,
according as the same spaces are transmitted in greater, or equal, or
less time, the lines A and B will exhibit the equality or inequality,
that is, the proportion of the times. To conclude, if the same lines, A
and B, be considered as drawn in the same time, then, seeing their
velocities are greater, or equal, or less, according as they pass over
in the same time longer, or equal, or shorter lines, the same lines, A
and B, will exhibit the equality, or inequality, that is, the proportion
of their velocities.

                                   A
                                  ---
                                   B


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XIII.

                 OF ANALOGISM, OR THE SAME PROPORTION.

1, 2, 3, 4. The nature and definition of proportion, arithmetical and
    geometrical.—5. The definition, and some properties of the same
    arithmetical proportion.—6, 7. The definition and transmutations of
    analogism, or the same geometrical proportion.—8, 9.. The
    definitions of hyperlogism and hypologism, that is, of greater and
    less proportion, and their transmutations.—10, 11, 12. Comparison of
    analogical quantities, according to magnitude.—13, 14, 15.
    Composition of proportions.—16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
    The definition and properties of continual proportion.—26, 27, 28,
    29. Comparison of arithmetical and geometrical proportions.

  [Note, that in this chapter the sign + signifies that the quantities
  betwixt which it is put, are added together; and this sign - the
  remainder after the latter quantity is taken out of the former. So
  that A + B is equal to both A and B together; and where you see A - B,
  there A is the whole, B the part taken out of it, and A - B the
  remainder. Also, two letters, set together without any sign, signify,
  unless they belong to a figure, that one of the quantities is
  multiplied by the other; as A B signifies the product of A multiplied
  by B.]


[Sidenote: The nature and definition of proportion, arithmetical &
           geometrical.]

1. Great and little are not intelligible, but by comparison. Now that,
to which they are compared, is something exposed; that is, some
magnitude either perceived by sense, or so defined by words, that it may
be comprehended by the mind. Also that, to which any magnitude is
compared, is either greater or less, or equal to it. And therefore
proportion (which, as I have shewn, is the estimation or comprehension
of magnitudes by comparison,) is threefold, namely, proportion of
_equality_, that is, of equal to equal; or of _excess_, which is of the
greater to the less; or of _defect_, which is the proportion of the less
to the greater.

Again, every one of these proportions is two-fold; for if it be asked
concerning any magnitude given, how great it is, the answer may be made
by comparing it two ways; first, by saying it is greater or less than
another magnitude, by so much; as seven is less than ten, by three
unities; and this is called _arithmetical proportion_. Secondly, by
saying it is greater or less than another magnitude, by such a part or
parts thereof; as seven is less than ten, by three tenth parts of the
same ten. And though this proportion be not always explicable by number,
yet it is a determinate proportion, and of a different kind from the
former, and called _geometrical proportion_, and most commonly
_proportion simply_.

2. Proportion, whether it be arithmetical or geometrical, cannot be
exposed but in two magnitudes, (of which the former is commonly called
the _antecedent_, and the latter the _consequent_ of the proportion) as
I have shewn in the 8th article of the preceding chapter. And,
therefore, if two proportions be to be compared, there must be four
magnitudes exposed, namely, two antecedents and two consequents; for
though it happen sometimes that the consequent of the former proportion
be the same with the antecedent of the latter, yet in that double
comparison it must of necessity be twice numbered; so that there will be
always four terms.

3. Of two proportions, whether they be arithmetical or geometrical, when
the magnitudes compared in both (which Euclid, in the fifth definition
of his sixth book, calls the _quantities of proportions_,) are equal,
then one of the proportions cannot be either greater or less than the
other; for one equality is neither greater nor less than another
equality. But of two proportions of inequality, whether they be
proportions of excess or of defect, one of them may be either greater or
less than the other, or they may both be equal; for though there be
propounded two magnitudes that are unequal to one another, yet there may
be other two more, unequal, and other two equally unequal, and other two
less unequal than the two which were propounded. And from hence it may
be understood, that the proportions of excess and defect are quantity,
being capable of more and less; but the proportion of equality is not
quantity, because not capable neither of _more_, nor of _less_. And
therefore proportions of inequality may be added together, or subtracted
from one another, or be multiplied or divided by one another, or by
number; but proportions of equality not so.

4. Two equal proportions are commonly called _the same proportion_; and,
it is said, that the proportion of the first antecedent to the first
consequent is the _same_ with that of the second antecedent to the
second consequent. And when four magnitudes are thus to one another in
geometrical proportion, they are called _proportionals_; and by some,
more briefly, _analogism_. And _greater proportion_ is the proportion of
a greater antecedent to the same consequent, or of the same antecedent
to a less consequent; and when the proportion of the first antecedent to
the first consequent is greater than that of the second antecedent to
the second consequent, the four magnitudes, which are so to one another,
may be called _hyperlogism_.

_Less proportion_ is the proportion of a less antecedent to the same
consequent, or of the same antecedent to a greater consequent; and when
the proportion of the first antecedent to the first consequent is less
than that of the second to the second, the four magnitudes may be called
_hypologism_.

[Sidenote: The definition and some properties of the same arithmetical
           proportion.]

5. One arithmetical proportion is the _same_ with another arithmetical
proportion, when one of the antecedents exceeds its consequent, or is
exceeded by it, as much as the other antecedent exceeds its consequent,
or is exceeded by it. And therefore, in four magnitudes, arithmetically
proportional, the sum of the extremes is equal to the sum of the means.
For if A. B :: C. D be arithmetically proportional, and the difference
on both sides be the same excess, or the same defect, E, then B + C (if
A be greater than B) will be equal to A - E + C; and A + D will be equal
to A + C - E; but A - E + C and A + C - E are equal. Or if A be less
than B, then B + C will be equal to A + E + C; and A + D will be equal
to A + C + E; but A + E + C and A + C + E are equal.

Also, if there be never so many magnitudes, arithmetically proportional,
the sum of them all will be equal to the product of half the number of
the terms multiplied by the sum of the extremes.

For if A. B :: C. D :: E. F be arithmetically proportional, the couples
A + F, B + E, C + D will be equal to one another; and their sum will be
equal to A + F, multiplied by the number of their combinations, that is,
by half the number of the terms.

If, of four unequal magnitudes, any two, together taken, be equal to the
other two together taken, then the greatest and the least of them will
be in the same combination. Let the unequal magnitudes be A, B, C, D;
and let A + B be equal to C + D; and let A be the greatest of them all;
I say B will be the least. For, if it may be, let any of the rest, as D,
be the least. Seeing therefore A is greater than C, and B than D, A+B
will be greater than C + D; which is contrary to what was supposed.

If there be any four magnitudes, the sum of the greatest and least, the
sum of the means, the difference of the two greatest, and the difference
of the two least, will be arithmetically proportional. For, let there be
four magnitudes, whereof A is the greatest, D the least, and B and C the
means; I say A + D. B + C :: A - B. C - D are arithmetically
proportional. For the difference between the first antecedent and its
consequent is this, A + D - B - C; and the difference between the second
antecedent and its consequent this, A - B - C + D; but these two
differences are equal; and therefore, by this 5th article, A + D. B + C
:: A - B. C - D are arithmetically proportional.

If, of four magnitudes, two be equal to the other two, they will be in
reciprocal arithmetical proportion. For let A + B be equal to C + D, I
say A. C :: D. B are arithmetically proportional. For if they be not,
let A. C :: D. E (supposing E to be greater or less than B) be
arithmetically proportional, and then A + E will be equal to C + D;
wherefore A + B and C + D are not equal; which is contrary to what was
supposed.

[Sidenote: The definition and transmutations of analogism, or the same
           geometrical proportion.]

6. One geometrical proportion is the same with another geometrical
proportion; when the same cause, producing equal effects in equal times,
determines both the proportions.

If a point uniformly moved describe two lines, either with the same, or
different velocity, all the parts of them which are contemporary, that
is, which are described in the same time, will be two to two, in
geometrical proportion, whether the antecedents be taken in the same
line, or not. For, from the point A (in the 10th figure at the end of
the 14th chapter) let the two lines, A D, A G, be described with uniform
motion; and let there be taken in them two parts A B, A E, and again,
two other parts, A C, A F; in such manner, that A B, A E, be
contemporary, and likewise A C, A F contemporary. I say first (taking
the antecedents A B, A C in the line A D, and the conquents A E, A F in
the line A G) that A B. A C :: A E. A F are proportionals. For seeing
(by the 8th chap, and the 15th art.) velocity is motion considered as
determined by a certain length or line, in a certain time transmitted by
it, the quantity of the line A B will be determined by the velocity and
time by which the same A B is described; and for the same reason, the
quantity of the line A C will be determined by the velocity and time, by
which the same A C is described; and therefore the proportion of A B to
A C, whether it be proportion of equality, or of excess or defect, is
determined by the velocities and times by which A B, A C are described;
but seeing the motion of the point A upon A B and A C is uniform, they
are both described with equal velocity; and therefore whether one of
them have to the other the proportion of majority or of minority, the
sole cause of that proportion is the difference of their times; and by
the same reason it is evident, that the proportion of A E to A F is
determined by the difference of their times only. Seeing therefore A B,
A E, as also A C, A F are contemporary, the difference of the times in
which A B and A C are described, is the same with that in which A E and
A F are described. Wherefore the proportion of A B to A C, and the
proportion of A E to A F are both determined by the same cause. But the
cause, which so determines the proportion of both, works equally in
equal times, for it is uniform motion; and therefore (by the last
precedent definition) the proportion of A B to A C is the same with that
of A E to A F; and consequently A B. A C :: A E. A F are proportionals;
which is the first.

Secondly, (taking the antecedents in different lines) I say, A B. A E ::
A C. A F are proportionals; for seeing A B, A E are described in the
same time, the difference of the velocities in which they are described
is the sole cause of the proportion they have to one another. And the
same may be said of the proportion of A C to A F. But seeing both the
lines A D and A G are passed over by uniform motion, the difference of
the velocities in which A B, A E are described, will be the same with
the difference of the velocities, in which A C, A F are described.
Wherefore the cause which determines the proportion of A B to A E, is
the same with that which determines the proportion of A C to A F; and
therefore A B. A E :: A C. A F, are proportionals; which remained to be
proved.

Coroll. I. If four magnitudes be in geometrical proportion, they will
also be proportionals by _permutation_, that is, by transposing the
middle terms. For I have shown, that not only A B. A C :: A E. A F, but
also that, by _permutation_, A B. A E :: A C. A F are proportionals.

Coroll. II. If there be four proportionals, they will also be
proportionals by _inversion_ or _conversion_, that is, by turning the
antecedents into consequents. For if in the last _analogism_, I had for
A B, A C, put by inversion A C, A B, and in like manner converted A E, A
F into A F, A E, yet the same demonstration had served. For as well A C,
A B, as A B, A C are of equal velocity; and A C, A F, as well as A F, A
C are contemporary.

Coroll. III. If proportionals be added to proportionals, or taken from
them, the aggregates, or remainders, will be proportionals. For
contemporaries, whether they be added to contemporaries, or taken from
them, make the aggregates or remainders contemporary, though the
addition or subtraction be of all the terms, or of the antecedents
alone, or of the consequents alone.

Coroll. IV. If both the antecedents of four proportionals, or both the
consequents, or all the terms, be multiplied or divided by the same
number or quantity, the products or quotients will be proportionals. For
the multiplication and division of proportionals, is the same with the
addition and subtraction of them.

Coroll. V. If there be four proportionals, they will also be
proportionals by _composition_, that is, by compounding an antecedent of
the antecedent and consequent put together, and by taking for consequent
either the consequent singly, or the antecedent singly. For this
composition is nothing but addition of proportionals, namely, of
consequents to their own antecedents, which by supposition are
proportionals.

Coroll. VI. In like manner, if the antecedent singly, or consequent
singly, be put for antecedent, and the consequent be made of both put
together, these also will be proportionals. For it is the _inversion of
proportion by composition_.

Coroll. VII. If there be four proportionals, they will also be
proportionals by division, that is, by taking the remainder after the
consequent is subtracted from the antecedent, or the difference between
the antecedent and consequent for antecedent, and either the whole or
the subtracted for consequent; as if A. B :: C. D be proportionals, they
will by division be A - B. B :: C - D. D, and A - B. A :: C - D. C; and
when the consequent is greater than the antecedent, B - A. A :: D - C.
C, and B - A. B :: D - C. D. For in all these divisions, proportionals
are, by the very supposition of the analogism A. B :: C. D, taken from A
and B, and from C and D.

Coroll. VIII. If there be four proportionals, they will also be
proportionals by the _conversion of proportion_, that is, by inverting
the divided proportion, or by taking the whole for antecedent, and the
difference or remainder for consequent.

As, if A. B :: C. D be proportionals, then A. A - B :: C. C - D, as also
B. A - B :: D. C - D will be proportionals. For seeing these inverted be
proportionals, they are also themselves proportionals.

Coroll. IX. If there be two analogisms which have their quantities
equal, the second to the second, and the fourth to the fourth, then
either the sum or difference of the first quantities will be to the
second, as the sum or difference of the third quantities is to the
fourth. Let A. B :: C. D and E. B :: F. D be analogisms; I say A + E. B
:: C + F. D are proportionals. For the said analogisms will by
permutation be A. C :: B. D, and E. F :: B. D; and therefore A. C :: E.
F will be proportionals, for they have both the proportion of B to D
common. Wherefore, if in the permutation of the first analogism, there
be added E and F to A and C, which E and F are proportional to A and C,
then (by the third coroll.) A + E. B :: C + F. D will be proportionals;
which was to be proved.

Also in the same manner it may be shown, that A - E. B :: C - F. D are
proportionals.

7. If there be two analogisms, where four antecedents make an analogism,
their consequents also shall make an analogism; as also the sums of
their antecedents will be proportional to the sums of their consequents.
For if A. B :: C. D and E. F :: G. H be two analogisms, and A. E :: C. G
be proportionals, then by permutation A. C :: E. G, and E. G :: F. H,
and A. C :: B. D will be proportionals; wherefore B. D :: E. G, that is,
B. D :: F. H, and by permutation B. F :: D. H are proportionals; which
is the first. Secondly, I say A + E. B + F :: C + G. D + H will be
proportionals. For seeing A. E :: C. G are proportionals, A + E. E :: C
+ G. G will also by composition be proportionals, and by permutation A +
E. C + G :: E. G will be proportionals; wherefore, also A + E. C + G ::
B + F. D + H will be proportionals. Again, seeing, as is shown above, B.
F :: D. H are proportionals, B + F. F :: D + H. H will also by
composition be proportionals; and by permutation B + F. D + H :: F. H
will also be proportionals; wherefore A + E. C + G :: B + F. D + H are
proportionals; which remained to be proved.

Coroll. By the same reason, if there be never so many analogisms, and
the antecedents be proportional to the antecedents, it may be
demonstrated also that the consequents will be proportional to the
consequents, as also the sum of the antecedents to the sum of the
consequents.

[Sidenote: The definition of hyperlogism and hypologism, that is, of
           greater and less proportion, and their transmutations.]

8. In an hyperlogism, that is, where the proportion of the first
antecedent to its consequent is greater than the proportion of the
second antecedent to its consequent, the permutation of the
proportionals, and the addition of proportionals to proportionals, and
substraction of them from one another, as also their composition and
division, and their multiplication and division by the same number,
produce always an hyperlogism. For suppose A. B :: C . D and A. C :: E.
F be analogisms, A + E. B :: C + F . D will also be an analogism; but A
+ E. B :: C. D will be an hyperlogism; wherefore by permutation, A + E.
C :: B. D is an hyperlogism, because A. B :: C. D is an analogism.
Secondly, if to the hyperlogism A + E. B :: C. D the proportionals G and
H be added, A + E + G. B :: C + H. D will be an hyperlogism, by reason A
+ E + G. B :: C + F + H. D is an analogism. Also, if G and H be taken
away, A + E - G. B :: C - H. D will be an hyperlogism; for A + E - G. B
:: C + F - H. D is an analogism. Thirdly, by composition A + E + B. B ::
C + D. D will be an hyperlogism, because A + E + B. B :: C + F + D. D is
ah analogism, and so it will be in all the varieties of composition.
Fourthly, by division, A + E - B. B :: C - D. D will by an hyperlogism,
by reason A E - B. B :: C + F - D. D is an analogism. Also A + E - B. A
+ E :: C - D. C is an hyperlogism; for A + E - B. A + E :: C + F - D. C
is an analogism. Fifthly, by multiplication 4 A + 4 E. B :: 4 C. D is an
hyperlogism, because 4 A. B :: 4 C. D is an analogism; and by division ¼
A + ¼ E. B :: ¼ C.D is an hyperlogism, because ¼ A. B :: ¼ C. D is an
analogism.

9. But if A + E. B :: C. D be an hyperlogism, then by inversion B. A + E
:: D. C will be an hypologism, because B. A :: D. C being an analogism,
the first consequent will be too great. Also, by conversion of
proportion, A + E. A + E - B :: C. C - D is an hypologism, because the
inversion of it, namely A + E - B. A + E :: C - D. C is an hyperlogism,
as I have shown but now. So also B. A + E - B :: D. C - D is an
hypologism, because, as I have newly shown, the inversion of it, namely
A + E - B. B :: C - D. D is an hyperlogism. Note that this hypologism A
+ E. A + E - B :: C. C - D is commonly thus expressed; if the proportion
of the whole, (A + E) to that which is taken out of it (B), be greater
than the proportion of the whole (C) to that which is taken out of it
(D), then the proportion of the whole (A + E) to the remainder (A + E -
B) will be less than the proportion of the whole (C) to the remainder (C
- D).

[Sidenote: Comparison of analogical quantities, according to magnitude.]

10. If there be four proportionals, the difference of the two first, to
the difference of the two last, will be as the first antecedent is to
the second antecedent, or as the first consequent to the second
consequent. For if A. B :: C. D be proportionals, then by division A -
B. B :: C - D. D will be proportionals; and by permutation A - B. C - D
:: B. D; that is, the differences are proportional to the consequents,
and therefore they are so also to the antecedents.

11. Of four proportionals, if the first be greater than the second, the
third also shall be greater than the fourth. For seeing the first is
greater than the second, the proportion of the first to the second is
the proportion of excess; but the proportion of the third to the fourth
is the same with that of the first to the second; and therefore also the
proportion of the third to the fourth is the proportion of excess;
wherefore the third is greater than the fourth. In the same manner it
may be proved, that whensoever the first is less than the second, the
third also is less than the fourth; and when those are equal, that these
also are equal.

12. If there be four proportionals whatsoever, A. B :: C.D, and the
first and third be multiplied by any one number, as by 2; and again the
second and fourth be multiplied by any one number, as by 3; and the
product of the first 2 A, be greater than the product of the second 3 B;
the product also of the third 2 C, will be greater than the product of
the fourth 3 D. But if the product of the first be less than the product
of the second, then the product of the third will be less than that of
the fourth. And lastly, if the products of the first and second be
equal, the products of the third and fourth shall also be equal. Now
this theorem is all one with Euclid's definition of _the same
proportion_; and it may be demonstrated thus. Seeing A. B :: C. D are
proportionals, by permutation also (art. 6, coroll. I.) A. C :: B . D
will be proportionals; wherefore (by coroll. IV. art. 6) 2 A. 2 C :: 3
B. 3 D will be proportionals; and again, by permutation, 2 A. 3 B :: 2
C. 3 D will be proportionals; and therefore, by the last article, if 2 A
be greater than 3 B, then 2 C will be greater than 3 D; if less, less;
and if equal, equal; which was to be demonstrated.

[Sidenote: Composition of proportions.]

If any three magnitudes be propounded, or three things whatsoever that
have any proportion one to another, as three numbers, three times, three
degrees, &c.; the proportions of the first to the second, and of the
second to the third, together taken, are equal to the proportion of the
first to the third. Let there be three lines, for any proportion may be
reduced to the proportion of lines, A B, A C, A D; and in the first
place, let the proportion as well of the first A B to the second A C, as
of the second A C to the third AD, be the proportion of defect, or of
less to greater; I say the proportions together taken of A B to A C, and
of A C to A D, are equal to the proportion of A B to A D. Suppose the
point A to be moved over the whole line A D with uniform motion; then
the proportions as well of A B to A C, as of A C to A D, are determined
by the difference of the times in which they are described; that is, A B
has to A C such proportion as is determined by the different times of
their description; and A C to AD such proportion as is determined by
their times. But the proportion of A B to A D is such as is determined
by the difference of the times in which A B and A D are described; and
the difference of the times in which A B and A C are described, together
with the difference of the times in which A C and A D are described, is
the same with the difference of the times in which A B and A D are
described. And therefore, the same cause which determines the two
proportions of A B to A C and of A C to A D, determines also the
proportion of A B to A D. Wherefore, by the definition of the same
proportion, delivered above in the 6th article, the proportion of A B to
A C together with the proportion of A C to A D, is the same with the
proportion of A B to A D.

                             A   B   C   D
                             -------------

In the second place, let A D be the first, A C the second, and A B the
third, and let their proportion be the proportion of excess, or the
greater to less; then, as before, the proportions of A D to A C, and of
A C to A B, and of A D to A B, will be determined by the difference of
their times; which in the description of A D and A C, and of A C and A B
together taken, is the same with the difference of the times in the
description of A D and A B. Wherefore the proportion of A D to A B is
equal to the two proportions of A D to A C and of A C to A B.

In the last place. If one of the proportions, namely of A D to A B, be
the proportion of excess, and another of them, as of A B to A C be the
proportion of defect, thus also the proportion of A D to A C will be
equal to the two proportions together taken of A D to A B, and of A B to
A C. For the difference of the times in which AD and AB are described,
is excess of time; for there goes more time to the description of A D
than of A B; and the difference of the times in which A B and A C are
described, is defect of time, for less time goes to the description of A
B than of A C; but this excess and defect being added together, make D B
- B C, which is equal to D C, by which the first A D exceeds the third A
C; and therefore the proportions of the first A D to the second A B, and
of the second A B to the third A C, are determined by the same cause
which determines the proportion of the first A D to the third A C.
Wherefore, if any three magnitudes, &c.

Coroll. I. If there be never so many magnitudes having proportion to one
another, the proportion of the first to the last is compounded of the
proportions of the first to the second, of the second to the third, and
so on till you come to the last; or, the proportion of the first to the
last is the same with the sum of all the intermediate proportions. For
any number of magnitudes having proportion to one another, as A, B, C,
D, E being propounded, the proportion of A to E, as is newly shown, is
compounded of the proportions of A to D and of D to E; and again, the
proportion of A to D, of the proportions of A to C, and of C to D; and
lastly, the proportion of A to C, of the proportions of A to B, and of B
to C.

Coroll. II. From hence it may be understood how any two proportions may
be compounded. For if the proportions of A to B, and of C to D, be
propounded to be added together, let B have to something else, as to E,
the same proportion which C has to D, and let them be set in this order,
A, B, E; for so the proportion of A to E will evidently be the sum of
the two proportions of A to B, and of B to E, that is, of C to D. Or let
it be as D to C, so A to something else, as to E, and let them be
ordered thus, E, A, B; for the proportion of E to B will be compounded
of the proportions of E to A, that is, of C to D, and of A to B. Also,
it may be understood how one proportion may be taken out of another. For
if the proportion of C to D be to be subtracted out of the proportion of
A to B, let it be as C to D, so A to something else, as E, and setting
them in this order, A, E, B, and taking away the proportion of A to E,
that is, of C to D, there will remain the proportion of E to B.

Coroll. III. If there be two orders of magnitudes which have proportion
to one another, and the several proportions of the first order be the
same and equal in number with the proportions of the second order; then,
whether the proportions in both orders be successively answerable to one
another, which is called _ordinate proportion_, or not successively
answerable, which is called _perturbed proportion_, the first and the
last in both will be proportionals. For the proportion of the first to
the last is equal to all the intermediate proportions; which being in
both orders the same, and equal in number, the aggregates of those
proportions will also be equal to one another; but to their aggregates,
the proportions of the first to the last are equal; and therefore the
proportion of the first to the last in one order, is the same with the
proportion of the first to the last in the other order. Wherefore the
first and the last in both are proportionals.

[Sidenote: Composition of proportions.]

14. If any two quantities be made of the mutual multiplication of many
quantities, which have proportion to one another, and the efficient
quantities on both sides be equal in number, the proportion of the
products will be compounded of the several proportions, which the
efficient quantities have to one another.

                                A B.  A.
                                C B.  C.
                                C D.  E.

First, let the two products be A B and C D, whereof one is made of the
multiplication of A into B, and the other of the multiplication of C
into D. I say the proportion of A B to C D is compounded of the
proportions of the efficient A to the efficient C, and of the efficient
B to the efficient D. For let A B, C B and C D be set in order; and as B
is to D, so let C be to another quantity as E; and let A, C, E be set
also in order. Then (by coroll. IV. of the 6th art.) it will be as A B
the first quantity to C B the second quantity in the first order, so A
to C in the second order; and again, as C B to C D in the first order,
so B to D, that is, by construction, so C to E in the second order; and
therefore (by the last corollary) A B. C D :: A. E will be
proportionals. But the proportion of A to E is compounded of the
proportions of A to C, and of B to D; wherefore also the proportion of A
B to C D is compounded of the same.

Secondly, let the two products be A B F, and C D G, each of them made of
three efficients, the first of A, B and F, and the second of C, D and G;
I say, the proportion of A B F to C D G is compounded of the proportions
of A to C, of B to D, and of F to G. For let them be set in order as
before; and as B is to D, so let C be to another quantity E; and again,
as F is to G, so let E be to another, H; and let the first order stand
thus, ABF, CBF, CDF and CDG; and the second order thus, A, C, E, H. Then
the proportion of A B F to C B F in the first order, will be as A to C
in the second; and the proportion of CBF to CDF in the first order, as B
to D, that is, as C to E (by construction) in the second order; and the
proportion of CDF to CDG in the first, as F to G, that is, as E to H (by
construction) in the second order; and therefore A B F. C D G:: A. H
will be proportionals. But the proportion of A to H is compounded of the
proportions of A to C, B to D, and F to G. Wherefore the proportion of
the product A B F to C D G is also compounded of the same. And this
operation serves, how many soever the efficients be that make the
quantities given.

                               ABF.   A.
                               CBF.   C.
                               CDF.   E.
                               CDG.   H.

From hence ariseth another way of compounding many proportions into one,
namely, that which is supposed in the 5th definition of the 6th book of
Euclid; which is, by multiplying all the antecedents of the proportions
into one another, and in like manner all the consequents into one
another. And from hence also it is evident, in the first place, that the
cause why parallelograms, which are made by the duction of two straight
lines into one another, and all solids which are equal to figures so
made, have their proportions compounded of the proportions of the
efficients; and in the second place, why the multiplication of two or
more fractions into one another is the same thing with the composition
of the proportions of their several numerators to their several
denominators. For example, if these fractions 1⁄2, 2⁄3, 3⁄4 be to be
multiplied into one another, the numerators 1, 2, 3, are first to be
multiplied into one another, which make 6; and next the denominators 2,
3, 4, which make 24; and these two products make the fraction 6⁄24. In
like manner, if the proportions of 1 to 2, of 2 to 3, and of 3 to 4, be
to be compounded, by working as I have shown above, the same proportion
of 6 to 24 will be produced.

15. If any proportion be compounded with itself inverted, the compound
will be the proportion of equality. For let any proportion be given, as
of A to B, and let the inverse of it be that of C to D; and as C to D,
so let B be to another quantity; for thus they will be compounded (by
the second coroll. of the 12th art.) Now seeing the proportion of C to D
is the inverse of the proportion of A to B, it will be as C to D, so B
to A; and therefore if they be placed in order, A, B, A, the proportion
compounded of the proportions of A to B, and of C to D, will be the
proportion of A to A, that is, the proportion of equality. And from
hence the cause is evident why two equal products have their efficients
reciprocally proportional. For, for the making of two products equal,
the proportions of their efficients must be such, as being compounded
may make the proportion of equality, which cannot be except one be the
inverse of the other; for if betwixt A and A any other quantity, as C,
be interposed, their order will be A, C, A, and the later proportion of
C to A will be the inverse of the former proportion of A to C.

[Sidenote: The definition and properties of continual proportion.]

16. A proportion is said to be multiplied by a number, when it is so
often taken as there be unities in that number; and if the proportion be
of the greater to the less, then shall also the quantity of the
proportion be increased by the multiplication; but when the proportion
is of the less to the greater, then as the number increaseth, the
quantity of the proportion diminisheth; as in these three numbers, 4, 2,
1, the proportion of 4 to 1 is not only the duplicate of 4 to 2, but
also twice as great; but inverting the order of those numbers thus, 1,
2, 4, the proportion of 1 to 2 is greater than that of 1 to 4; and
therefore though the proportion of 1 to 4 be the duplicate of 1 to 2,
yet it is not twice so great as that of 1 to 2, but contrarily the half
of it. In like manner, a proportion is said to be divided, when between
two quantities are interposed one or more means in continual proportion,
and then the proportion of the first to the second is said to be
subduplicate of that of the first to the third, and subtriplicate of
that of the first to the fourth, &c.

This mixture of proportions, where some are proportions of excess,
others of defect, as in a merchant's account of debtor and creditor, is
not so easily reckoned as some think; but maketh the composition of
proportions sometimes to be addition, sometimes substraction; which
soundeth absurdly to such as have always by composition understood
addition, and by diminution substraction. Therefore to make this account
a little clearer, we are to consider (that which is commonly assumed,
and truly) that if there be never so many quantities, the proportion of
the first to the last is compounded of the proportions of the first to
the second, and of the second to the third, and so on to the last,
without regarding their equality, excess, or defect; so that if two
proportions, one of inequality, the other of equality, be added
together, the proportion is not thereby made greater nor less; as for
example, if the proportions of A to B and of B to B be compounded, the
proportion of the first to the second is as much as the sum of both,
because proportion of equality, being not quantity, neither augmenteth
quantity nor lesseneth it. But if there be three quantities, A, B, C,
unequal, and the first be the greatest, the last least, then the
proportion of B to C is an addition to that of A to B, and makes it
greater; and on the contrary, if A be the least, and C the greatest
quantity, then doth the addition of the proportion of B to C make the
compounded proportion of A to C less than the proportion of A to B, that
is, the whole less than the part. The composition therefore of
proportions is not in this case the augmentation of them, but the
diminution; for the same quantity (Euclid V. 8) compared with two other
quantities, hath a greater proportion to the lesser of them than to the
greater. Likewise, when the proportions compounded are one of excess,
the other of defect, if the first be of excess, as in these numbers, 8,
6, 9, the proportion compounded, namely, of 8 to 9, is less than the
proportion of one of the parts of it, namely, of 8 to 6; but if the
proportion of the first to the second be of defect, and that of the
second to the third be of excess, as in these numbers, 6, 8, 4, then
shall the proportion of the first to the third be greater than that of
the first to the second, as 6 hath a greater proportion to 4 than to 8;
the reason whereof is manifestly this, that the less any quantity is
deficient of another, or the more one exceedeth another, the proportion
of it to that other is the greater. Suppose now three quantities in
continual proportion, A B 4, A C 6, A D 9. Because therefore A D is
greater than A C, but not greater than A D, the proportion of A D to AC
will be (by Euclid, V. 8) greater than that of A D to A D; and likewise,
because the proportions of A D to A C, and of A C to A B are the same,
the proportions of A D to A C and of A C to A B, being both proportions
of excess, make the whole proportion of A D to A B, or of 9 to 4, not
only the duplicate of A D to A C, that is, of 9 to 6, but also the
double, or twice so great. On the other side, because the proportion of
A D to A D, or 9 to 9, being proportion of equality, is no quantity, and
yet greater than that of A C to A D, or 6 to 9, it will be as 0 - 9 to 0
- 6, so A C to A D, and again, as 0 - 9 to 0 - 6, so 0 - 6 to 0 - 4; but
0 - 4, 0 - 6, 0 - 9 are in continual proportion; and because 0 - 4 is
greater than 0 - 6, the proportion of 0 - 4 to 0 - 6 will be double to
the proportion of 0 - 4 to 0 - 9, double I say, and yet not duplicate,
but subduplicate.

If any be unsatisfied with this ratiocination, let him first consider
that (by Euclid V. 8) the proportion of A B to A C is greater than that
of A B to A D, wheresoever D be placed in the line A C prolonged; and
the further off the point

D is from C, so much the greater is the proportion of A B to A C than
that of A B to A D. There is therefore some point (which suppose be E)
in such distance from C, as that the proportion of A B to A C will be
twice as great as that of A B to A E. That considered, let him determine
the length of the line A E, and demonstrate, if he can, that A E is
greater or less than A D.

                                Ḅ  C̣   Ḍ
                                A—————E

By the same method, if there be more quantities than three, as A, B, C,
D, in continual proportion, and A be the least, it may be made appear
that the proportion of A to B is triple magnitude, though subtriple in
multitude, to the proportion of A to D.

17. If there be never so many quantities, the number whereof is odd, and
their order such, that from the middlemost quantity both ways they
proceed in continual proportion, the proportion of the two which are
next on either side to the middlemost is subduplicate to the proportion
of the two which are next to these on both sides, and subtriplicate of
the proportion of the two which are yet one place more remote, &c. For
let the magnitudes be C, B, A, D, E, and let A, B, C, as also A, D, E be
in continual proportion; I say the proportion of D to B is subduplicate
of the proportion of E to C. For the proportion of D to B is compounded
of the proportions of D to A, and of A to B once taken; but the
proportion of E to C is compounded of the same twice taken; and
therefore the proportion of D to B is subduplicate of the proportion of
E to C. And in the same manner, if there were three terms on either
side, it might be demonstrated that the proportion of D to B would be
subtriplicate of that of the extremes, &c.

18. If there be never so many continual proportionals, as the first,
second, third, &c. their differences will be proportional to them. For
the second, third, &c. are severally consequents of the preceding, and
antecedents of the following proportion. But (by art. 10) the difference
of the first antecedent and consequent, to difference of the second
antecedent and consequent, is as the first antecedent to the second
antecedent, that is, as the first term to the second, or as the second
to the third, &c. in continual proportionals.

19. If there be three continual proportionals, the sum of the extremes,
together with the mean twice taken, the sum of the mean and either of
the extremes, and the same extreme, are continual proportionals. For let
A. B. C be continual proportionals. Seeing, therefore, A. B :: B. C are
proportionals, by composition also A + B. B :: B + C. C will be
proportionals; and by permutation A + B. B + C :: B. C will also be
proportionals; and again, by composition A + 2B + C. B + C :: B + C. C;
which was to be proved.

20. In four continual proportionals, the greatest and the least put
together is a greater quantity than the other two put together. Let A. B
:: C. D be continual proportionals; whereof let the greatest be A, and
the least be D; I say A + D is greater than B + C. For by art. 10, A -
B. C - D :: A. C are proportionals; and therefore A - B is, by art. 11,
greater than C - D. Add B on both sides, and A will be greater than C +
B - D. And again, add D on both sides, and A + D will be greater than B
+ C; which was to be proved.

[Sidenote: The definition and properties of continual proportion.]

21. If there be four proportionals, the extremes multiplied into one
another, and the means multiplied into one another, will make equal
products. Let A. B :: C. D be proportionals; I say A D is equal to B C.
For the proportion of A D to B C is compounded, by art. 13, of the
proportions of A to B, and D to C, that is, its inverse B to A; and
therefore, by art. 14, this compounded proportion is the proportion of
equality; and therefore also, the proportion of A D to B C is the
proportion of equality. Wherefore they are equal.

22. If there be four quantities, and the proportion of the first to the
second be duplicate of the proportion of the third to the fourth, the
product of the extremes to the product of the means, will be as the
third to the fourth. Let the four quantities be A, B, C and D; and let
the proportion of A to B be duplicate of the proportion of C to D, I say
A D, that is, the product of A into D is to B C, that is, to the product
of the means, as C to D. For seeing the proportion of A to B is
duplicate of the proportion of C to D, if it be as C to D, so D to
another, E, then A. B :: C. E will be proportionals; for the proportion
of A to B is by supposition duplicate of the proportion of C to D; and C
to E duplicate also of that of C to D by the definition, art. 15.
Wherefore, by the last article, A E or A into E is equal to B C or B
into C; but, by coroll. IV. art. 6, A D is to A E as D to E, that is, as
C to D; and therefore A D is to B C, which as I have shown is equal to A
E, as C to D; which was to be proved.

Moreover, if the proportion of the first A to the second B be triplicate
of the proportion of the third C to the fourth D, the product of the
extremes to the product of the means will be duplicate of the proportion
of the third to the fourth. For if it be as C to D so D to E, and again,
as D to E so E to another, F, then the proportion of C to F will be
triplicate of the proportion of C to D; and consequently, A. B :: C. F
will be proportionals, and A F equal to B C. But as A D to A F, so is D
to F; and therefore, also, as A D to B C, so D to F, that is, so C to E;
but the proportion of C to E is duplicate of the proportion of C to D;
wherefore, also, the proportion of A D to B C is duplicate of that of C
to D, as was propounded.

23. If there be four proportionals, and a mean be interposed betwixt the
first and second, and another betwixt the third and fourth, the first of
these means will be to the second, as the first of the proportionals is
to the third, or as the second of them is to the fourth. For let A. B ::
C. D be proportionals, and let E be a mean betwixt A and B, and F a mean
betwixt C and D; I say A. C :: E. F are proportionals. For the
proportion of A to E is subduplicate of the proportion of A to B, or of
C to D. Also, the proportion of C to F is subduplicate of that of C to
D; and therefore A. E :: C. F are proportionals; and by permutation A. C
:: E. F are also proportionals; which was to be proved.

24. Any thing is said to be divided into extreme and mean proportion,
when the whole and the parts are in continual proportion. As for
example, when A + B. A. B are continual proportionals; or when the
straight line A C is so divided in B, that A C. A B. B C are in
continual proportion. And if the same line A C be again divided in D, so
as that A C. C D. A D be continual proportionals; then also A C. A B. A
D will be continual proportionals; and in like manner, though in
contrary order, C A. C D. C B will be continual proportionals; which
cannot happen in any line otherwise divided.

                             A        B   C
                             ----|----|----
                                 D

25. If there be three continual proportionals, and again, three other
continual proportions, which have the same middle term, their extremes
will be in reciprocal proportion. For let A. B. C and D. B. E be
continual proportionals, I say A. D :: E. C shall be proportionals. For
the proportion of A to D is compounded of the proportions of A to B, and
of B to D; and the proportion of E to C is compounded of those of E to
B, that is, of B to D, and of B to C, that is, of A to B. Wherefore, by
equality, A. D :: E. C are proportionals.

[Sidenote: Comparison of arithmetical and geometrical proportion.]

If any two unequal quantities be made extremes, and there be interposed
betwixt them any number of means in geometrical proportion, and the same
number of means in arithmetical proportion, the several means in
geometrical proportion will be less than the several means in
arithmetical proportion. For betwixt A the lesser, and E the greater
extreme, let there be interposed three means, B, C, D, in geometrical
proportion, and as many more, F, G, H, in arithmetical proportion; I say
B will be less than F, C than G, and D than H. For first, the difference
between A and F is the same with that between F and G, and with that
between G and H, by the definition of arithmetical proportion; and
therefore, the difference of the proportionals which stand next to one
another, to the difference of the extremes, is, when there is but one
mean, half their difference; when two, a third part of it; when three, a
quarter, &c.; so that in this example it is a quarter. But the
difference between D and E, by art. 17, is more than a quarter of the
difference between the extremes, because the proportion is geometrical,
and therefore the difference between A and D is less than three quarters
of the same difference of the extremes. In like manner, if the
difference between A and D be understood to be divided into three equal
parts, it may be proved, that the difference between A and C is less
than two quarters of the difference of the extremes A and E. And lastly,
if the difference between A and C be divided into two equal parts, that
the difference between A and B is less than a quarter of the difference
of the extremes A and E.

                              A         A
                              -         -
                              B         F
                             ---       ---
                              C         G
                            -----     -----
                              D         H
                           -------   -------
                              E         E
                          --------- ---------

From the consideration hereof, it is manifest, that B, that is A
together with something else which is less than a fourth part of the
difference of the extremes A and E, is less than F, that is, than the
same A with something else which is equal to the said fourth part. Also,
that C, that is A with something else which is less than two fourth
parts of the said difference, is less than G, that is, than A together
with the said two-fourths. And lastly, that D, which exceeds A by less
than three-fourths of the said difference, is less than H, which exceeds
the same A by three entire fourths of the said difference. And in the
same manner it would be if there were four means, saving that instead of
fourths of the difference of the extremes we are to take fifth parts;
and so on.

27. LEMMA. If a quantity being given, first one quantity be both added
to it and subtracted from it, and then another greater or less, the
proportion of the remainder to the aggregate, is greater where the less
quantity is added and substracted, than where the greater quantity is
added and substracted. Let B be added to and substracted from the
quantity A; so that A - B be the remainder, and A + B the aggregate; and
again, let C, a greater quantity than B, be added to and substracted
from the same A, so that A - C be the remainder and A + C the aggregate;
I say A - B. A + B :: A - C. A + C will be an hyperlogism. For A - B. A
:: A - C. A is an hyperlogism of a greater antecedent to the same
consequent; and therefore A - B. A + B :: A - C. A + C is a much greater
hyperlogism, being made of a greater antecedent to a less consequent.

28. If unequal parts be taken from two equal quantities, and betwixt the
whole and the part of each there be interposed two means, one in
geometrical, the other in arithmetical proportion; the difference
betwixt the two means will be greatest, where the difference betwixt the
whole and its part is greatest. For let A B and A B be two equal
quantities, from which let two unequal parts be taken, namely, A E the
less, and A F the greater; and betwixt A B and A E let A G be a mean in
geometrical proportion, and A H a mean in arithmetical proportion. Also
betwixt A B and A F let A I be a mean in geometrical proportion, and A K
a mean in arithmetical proportion; I say H G is greater than K I.

                            A  E   G   H   B
                            ---+---+---+----
                            ----+---+---+---
                            A   F   I   K  B

 For in the first place we have this      A B. A G :: B G. G E, by
   analogism                                     article 18.


 Then by composition we have this        A B + A G. A B :: B G + G E
                                             that is, B E. B G.


 And by taking the halves of the      ½A B + ½A G. A B :: ½B G + ½G E,
   antecedents this third                    that is, B H. B G.


 And by conversion a fourth             A B. ½A B + ½A G :: B G. B H.


 And by division this fifth               ½A B - ½A G. ½A B + ½A G
                                                :: H G. B H.


 And by doubling the first
   antecedent and the first
   consequent                         A B - A G. A B + A G :: H G. B H.


 Also by the same method may be
   found out this analogism           A B - A I. A B + AI :: K I. B K.

Now seeing the proportion of A B to A E is greater than that of A B to A
F, the proportion of A B to A G, which is half the greater proportion,
is greater than the proportion of A B to A I the half of the less
proportion; and therefore A I is greater than A G. Wherefore the
proportion of A B - A G to A B + A G, by the precedent lemma, will be
greater than the proportion of A B - A I to A B + A I; and therefore
also the proportion of H G to B H will be greater than that of K I to B
K, and much greater than the proportion of K I to B H, which is greater
than B K; for B H is the half of B E, as B K is the half of B F, which,
by supposition, is less than B E. Wherefore H G is greater than K I;
which was to be proved.

Coroll. It is manifest from hence, that if any quantity be supposed to
be divided into equal parts infinite in number, the difference between
the arithmetical and geometrical means will be infinitely little, that
is, none at all. And upon this foundation, chiefly, the art of making
those numbers, which are called Logarithms, seems to have been built.

29. If any number of quantities be propounded, whether they be unequal,
or equal to one another; and there be another quantity, which multiplied
by the number of the propounded quantities, is equal to them all; that
other quantity is a mean in arithmetical proportion to all those
propounded quantities.


                                -------


                               CHAP. XIV.

                    OF STRAIT AND CROOKED, ANGLE AND
                                FIGURE.

1. The definition and properties of a strait line.—2. The definition and
    properties of a plane superficies.—3. Several sorts of crooked
    lines.—4. The definition and properties of a circular line.—5. The
    properties of a strait line taken in a plane.—6.. The definition of
    tangent lines.—7. The definition of an angle, and the kinds
    thereof.—8. In concentric circles, arches of the same angle are to
    one another, as the whole circumferences are.—9. The quantity of an
    angle, in what it consists. —10. The distinction of angles, simply
    so called.—11. Of strait lines from the centre of a circle to a
    tangent of the same. —12. The general definition of parallels, and
    the properties of strait parallels.—13. The circumferences of
    circles are to one another, as their diameters are.—14. In
    triangles, strait lines parallel to the bases are to one another, as
    the parts of the sides which they cut off from the vertex.—15. By
    what fraction of a strait line the circumference of a circle is
    made.—16. That an angle of contingence is quantity, but of a
    different kind from that of an angle simply so called; and that it
    can neither add nor take away any thing from the same.—17. That the
    inclination of planes is angle simply so called.—18. A solid angle
    what it is.—19. What is the nature of asymptotes.—20. Situation, by
    what it is determined.—21. What is like situation; what is figure;
    and what are like figures.


[Sidenote: The definition end properties of a strait line.]

1. Between two points given, the shortest line is that, whose extreme
points cannot be drawn farther asunder without altering the quantity,
that is, without altering the proportion of that line to any other line
given. For the magnitude of a line is computed by the greatest distance
which may be between its extreme points; so that any one line, whether
it be extended or bowed, has always one and the same length, because it
can have but one greatest distance between its extreme points.

And seeing the action, by which a strait line is made crooked, or
contrarily a crooked line is made strait, is nothing but the bringing of
its extreme points nearer to one another, or the setting of them further
asunder, a _crooked line_ may rightly be defined to be _that, whose
extreme points may be understood to be drawn further asunder_; and a
_strait line_ to be _that, whose extreme points cannot be drawn further
asunder; and comparatively, a more crooked, to be that line whose
extreme points are nearer to one another than those of the other,
supposing both the lines to be of equal length_. Now, howsoever a line
be bowed, it makes always a _sinus_ or cavity, sometimes on one side,
sometimes on another; so that the same crooked line may either have its
whole cavity on one side only, or it may have it part on one side and
part on the other side. Which being well understood, it will be easy to
understand the following comparisons of strait and crooked lines.

First, if a strait and a crooked line have their extreme points common,
the crooked line is longer than the strait line. For if the extreme
points of the crooked line be drawn out to their greatest distance, it
will be made a strait line, of which that, which was a strait line from
the beginning, will be but a part; and therefore the strait line was
shorter than the crooked line, which had the same extreme points. And
for the same reason, if two crooked lines have their extreme points
common, and both of them have all their cavity on one and the same side,
the outermost of the two will be the longest line.

Secondly, a strait line and a perpetually crooked line cannot be
coincident, no, not in the least part. For if they should, then not only
some strait line would have its extreme points common with some crooked
line, but also they would, by reason of their coincidence, be equal to
one another; which, as I have newly shown, cannot be.

Thirdly, between two points given, there can be understood but one
strait line; because there cannot be more than one least interval or
length between the same points. For if there may be two, they will
either be coincident, and so both of them will be one strait line; or if
they be not coincident, then the application of one to the other by
extension will make the extended line have its extreme points at greater
distance than the other; and consequently, it was crooked from the
beginning.

Fourthly, from this last it follows, that two strait lines cannot
include a superficies. For if they have both their extreme points
common, they are coincident; and if they have but one or neither of them
common, then at one or both ends the extreme points will be disjoined,
and include no superficies, but leave all open and undetermined.

Fifthly, every part of a strait line is a strait line. For seeing every
part of a strait line is the least that can be drawn between its own
extreme points, if all the parts should not constitute a strait line,
they would altogether be longer than the whole line.

[Sidenote: The definition and properties of a plane superficies.]

2. A _plane_ or _a plane superficies, is that which is described by a
strait line so moved, that all the several points thereof describe
several strait lines_. A strait line, therefore, is necessarily all of
it in the same plane which it describes. Also the strait lines, which
are made by the points that describe a plane, are all of them in the
same plane. Moreover, if any line whatsoever be moved in a plane, the
lines, which are described by it, are all of them in the same plane.

All other superficies, which are not plane, are crooked, that is, are
either concave or convex. And the same comparisons, which were made of
strait and crooked lines, may also be made of plane and crooked
superficies.

For, first, if a plane and crooked superficies be terminated with the
same lines, the crooked superficies is greater than the plane
superficies. For if the lines, of which the crooked superficies
consists, be extended, they will be found to be longer than those of
which the plane superficies consists, which cannot be extended, because
they are strait.

Secondly, two superficies, whereof the one is plane, and the other
continually crooked, cannot be coincident, no, not in the least part.
For if they were coincident, they would be equal; nay, the same
superficies would be both plane and crooked, which is impossible.

Thirdly, within the same terminating lines there can be no more than one
plane superficies; because there can be but one least superficies within
the same.

Fourthly, no number of plane superficies can include a solid, unless
more than two of them end in a common vertex. For if two planes have
both the same terminating lines, they are coincident, that is, they are
but one superficies; and if their terminating lines be not the same,
they leave one or more sides open.

Fifthly, every part of a plane superficies is a plane superficies. For
seeing the whole plane superficies is the least of all those, that have
the same terminating lines; and also every part of the same superficies
is the least of all those, that are terminated with the same lines; if
every part should not constitute a plane superficies, all the parts put
together would not be equal to the whole.

[Sidenote: Several sorts of crooked lines.]

3. Of straitness, whether it be in lines or in superficies, there is but
one kind; but of crookedness there are many kinds; for of crooked
magnitudes, some are congruous, that is, are coincident when they are
applied to one other; others are incongruous. Again, some are
ὁμοιομερεῖς or uniform, that is, have their parts, howsoever taken,
congruous to one another; others are ἀνομοιομερεῖς or of several forms.
Moreover, of such as are crooked, some are continually crooked, others
have parts which are not crooked.

[Sidenote: Definition and properties of a circular line.]

4. If a strait line be moved in a plane, in such manner, that while one
end of it stands still, the whole line be carried round about till it
come again into the same place from whence it was first moved, it will
describe a plane superficies, which will be terminated every way by that
crooked line, which is made by that end of the strait line which was
carried round. Now this superficies is called a CIRCLE; and of this
circle, the unmoved point is the _centre_; the crooked line which
terminates it, the _perimeter_; and every part of that crooked line, a
_circumference_ or _arch_; the strait line, which generated the
_circle_, is the _semidiameter_ or _radius_; and any strait line, which
passeth through the centre and is terminated on both sides in the
circumference, is called the _diameter_. Moreover, every point of the
radius, which describes the circle, describes in the same time its own
perimeter, terminating its own circle, which is said to be _concentric_
to all the other circles, because this and all those have one common
centre.

Wherefore in every circle, all strait lines from the centre to the
circumference are equal. For they are all coincident with the radius
which generates the circle.

Also the diameter divides both the perimeter and the circle itself into
two equal parts. For if those two parts be applied to one another, and
the semiperimeters be coincident, then, seeing they have one common
diameter, they will be equal; and the semicircles will be equal also;
for these also will be coincident. But if the semiperimeters be not
coincident, then some one strait line, which passes through the centre,
which centre is in the diameter, will be cut by them in two points.
Wherefore, seeing all the strait lines from the centre to the
circumference are equal, a part of the same strait line will be equal to
the whole; which is impossible.

For the same reason the perimeter of a circle will be uniform, that is,
any one part of it will be coincident with any other equal part of the
same.

[Sidenote: The properties of a strait line taken in a plane.]

5. From hence may be collected this property of a strait line, namely,
that it is all contained in that plane which contains both its extreme
points. For seeing both its extreme points are in the plane, that strait
line, which describes the plane, will pass through them both; and if one
of them be made a centre, and at the distance between both a
circumference be described, whose radius is the strait line which
describes the plane, that circumference will pass through the other
point. Wherefore between the two propounded points, there is one strait
line, by the definition of a circle, contained wholly in the propounded
plane; and therefore if another strait line might be drawn between the
same points, and yet not be contained in the same plane, it would
follow, that between two points two strait lines may be drawn; which has
been demonstrated to be impossible.

It may also be collected, that if two planes cut one another, their
common section will be a strait line. For the two extreme points of the
intersection are in both the intersecting planes; and between those
points a strait line may be drawn; but a strait line between any two
points is in the same plane, in which the points are; and seeing these
are in both the planes, the strait line which connects them will also be
in both the same planes, and therefore it is the common section of both.
And every other line, that can be drawn between those points, will be
either coincident with that line, that is, it will be the same line; or
it will not be coincident, and then it will be in neither, or but in one
of those planes.

As a strait line may be understood to be moved round about whilst one
end thereof remains fixed, as the centre; so in like manner it is easy
to understand, that a plane may be circumduced about a strait line,
whilst the strait line remains still in one and the same place, as the
_axis_ of that motion. Now from hence it is manifest, that any three
points are in some one plane. For as any two points, if they be
connected by a strait line, are understood to be in the same plane in
which the strait line is; so, if that plane be circumduced about the
same strait line, it will in its revolution take in any third point,
howsoever it be situate; and then the three points will be all in that
plane; and consequently the three strait lines which connect those
points, will also be in the same plane.

[Sidenote: Definition of tangent lines.]

6. Two lines are said to _touch_ one another, which being both drawn to
one and the same point, will not cut one another, though they be
produced, produced, I say, in the same manner in which they were
generated. And therefore if two strait lines touch one another in any
one point, they will be contiguous through their whole length. Also two
lines continually crooked will do the same, if they be congruous and be
applied to one another according to their congruity; otherwise, if they
be incongruously applied, they will, as all other crooked lines, touch
one another, where they touch, but in one point only. Which is manifest
from this, that there can be no congruity between a strait line and a
line that is continually crooked; for otherwise the same line might be
both strait and crooked. Besides, when a strait line touches a crooked
line, if the strait line be never so little moved about upon the point
of contact, it will cut the crooked line; for seeing it touches it but
in one point, if it incline any way, it will do more than touch it; that
is, it will either be congruous to it, or it will cut it; but it cannot
be congruous to it; and therefore it will cut it.

[Sidenote: The definition of an angle, and the kinds thereof.]

7. An angle, according to the most general acceptation of the word, may
be thus defined; _when two lines, or many superficies, concur in one
sole point, and diverge every where else, the quantity of that
divergence is an_ ANGLE. And an angle is of two sorts; for, first, it
may be made by the concurrence of lines, and then it is a _superficial
angle_; or by the concurrence of superficies, and then it is called a
_solid angle_.

Again, from the two ways by which two lines may diverge from one
another, superficial angles are divided into two kinds. For two strait
lines, which are applied to one another, and are contiguous in their
whole length, may be separated or pulled open in such manner, that their
concurrence in one point will still remain; and this separation or
opening may be either by circular motion, the centre whereof is their
point of concurrence, and the lines will still retain their straitness,
the quantity of which separation or divergence is an _angle_ simply so
called; or they may be separated by continual flexion or curvation in
every imaginable point; and the quantity of this separation is that,
which is called an _angle of contingence_.

Besides, of superficial angles simply so called, those, which are in a
plane superficies, are plane; and those, which are not plane, are
denominated from the superficies in which they are.

Lastly, those are _strait-lined angles_, which are made by strait lines;
as those which are made by crooked lines are _crooked-lined_; and those
which are made both of strait and crooked lines, are _mixed angles_.

[Sidenote: In concentric circles, arches of the same angle are to one
           another, as the whole circumferences are.]

8. Two arches intercepted between two radii of concentric circles, have
the same proportion to one another, which their whole perimeters have to
one another. For let the point A (in the first figure) be the centre of
the two circles B C D and E F G, in which the radii A E B and A F C
intercept the arches B C and E F; I say the proportion of the arch B C
to the arch E F is the same with that of the perimeter B C D to the
perimeter E F G. For if the radius A F C be understood to be moved about
the centre A with circular and uniform motion, that is, with equal
swiftness everywhere, the point C will in a certain time describe the
perimeter B C D, and in a part of that time the arch B C; and because
the velocities are equal by which both the arch and the whole perimeter
are described, the proportion of the magnitude of the perimeter B C D to
the magnitude of the arch BC is determined by nothing but the difference
of the times in which the perimeter and the arch are described. But both
the perimeters are described in one and the same time, and both the
arches in one and the same time; and therefore the proportions of the
perimeter B C D to the arch B C, and of the perimeter E F G to the arch
E F, are both determined by the same cause. Wherefore B C D. B C :: E F
G. E F are proportionals (by the 6th art. of the last chapter), and by
permutation B C D. E F G :: B C. E F will also be proportionals; which
was to be demonstrated.

[Sidenote: The quantity of an angle, in what it consists.]

9. Nothing is contributed towards the quantity of an angle, neither by
the length, nor by the equality, nor by the inequality of the lines
which comprehend it. For the lines A B and A C comprehend the same angle
which is comprehended by the lines A E and A F, or A B and A F. Nor is
an angle either increased or diminished by the absolute quantity of the
arch, which subtends the same; for both the greater arch B C and the
lesser arch E F are subtended to the same angle. But the quantity of an
angle is estimated by the quantity of the subtending arch compared with
the quantity of the whole perimeter. And therefore the quantity of an
angle simply so called may be thus defined: _the quantity of an angle is
an arch or circumference of a circle, determined by its proportion to
the whole perimeter_. So that when an arch is intercepted between two
strait lines drawn from the centre, look how great a portion that arch
is of the whole perimeter, so great is the angle. From whence it may be
understood, that when the lines which contain an angle are strait lines,
the quantity of that angle may be taken at any distance from the centre.
But if one or both of the containing lines be crooked, then the quantity
of the angle is to be taken in the least distance from the centre, or
from their concurrence; for the least distance is to be considered as a
strait line, seeing no crooked line can be imagined so little, but that
there may be a less strait line. And although the least strait line
cannot be given, because the least given line may still be divided, yet
we may come to a part so small, as is not at all considerable; which we
call a point. And this point may be understood to be in a strait line
which touches a crooked line; for an angle is generated by separating,
by circular motion, one strait line from another which touches it, as
has been said above in the 7th article. Wherefore an angle, which two
crooked lines make, is the same with that which is made by two strait
lines which touch them.

[Sidenote: The distinction of angles, simply so called.]

10. From hence it follows, that _vertical angles_, such as are A B C, D
B F in the second figure, are equal to one another. For if, from the two
semiperimeters D A C, F D A, which are equal to one another, the common
arch D A be taken away, the remaining arches A C, D F will be equal to
one another.

Another distinction of angles is into _right_ and _oblique_. _A right
angle is that, whose quantity is the fourth part of the perimeter._ And
the lines, which make a right angle, are said to be _perpendicular_ to
one another. Also, of oblique angles, that which is greater than a
right, is called an _obtuse angle_; and that which is less, an _acute
angle_. From whence it follows, that all the angles that can possibly be
made at one and the same point, together taken, are equal to four right
angles; because the quantities of them all put together make the whole
perimeter. Also, that all the angles, which are made on one side of a
strait line, from any one point taken in the same, are equal to two
right angles; for if that point be made the centre, that strait line
will be the diameter of a circle, by whose circumference the quantity of
an angle is determined; and that diameter will divide the perimeter into
two equal parts.

[Sidenote: Of strait lines from the centre of a circle to a tangent of
           the same.]

11. If a tangent be made the diameter of a circle, whose centre is the
point of contact, a strait line drawn from the centre of the former
circle to the centre of the latter circle, will make two angles with the
tangent, that is, with the diameter of the latter circle, equal to two
right angles, by the last article. And because, by the 6th article, the
tangent has on both sides equal inclination to the circle, each of them
will be a right angle; as also the semidiameter will be perpendicular to
the same tangent. Moreover, the semidiameter, inasmuch as it is the
semidiameter, is the least strait line which can be drawn from the
centre to the tangent; and every other strait line, that reaches the
tangent, will pass out of the circle, and will therefore be greater than
the semidiameter. In like manner, of all the strait lines, which may be
drawn from the centre to the tangent, that is the greatest which makes
the greatest angle with the perpendicular; which will be manifest, if
about the same centre another circle be described, whose semidiameter is
a strait line taken nearer to the perpendicular, and there be drawn a
perpendicular, that is, a tangent, to the same.

From whence it is also manifest, that if two strait lines, which make
equal angles on either side of the perpendicular, be produced to the
tangent, they will be equal.

[Sidenote: The general definition of parallels; the properties of strait
           parallels.]

12. There is in Euclid a definition of strait-lined parallels; but I do
not find that parallels in general are anywhere defined; and therefore
for an universal definition of them, I say that _any two lines
whatsoever, strait or crooked, as also any two superficies, are_
PARALLEL; _when two equal strait lines, wheresoever they fall upon them,
make always equal angles with each of them_.

From which definition it follows; first, that any two strait lines, not
inclined opposite ways, falling upon two other strait lines, which are
parallel, and intercepting equal parts in both of them, are themselves
also equal and parallel. As if A B and C D (in the third figure),
inclined both the same way, fall upon the parallels A C and B D, and A C
and B D be equal, A B and C D will also be equal and parallel. For the
perpendiculars B E and D F being drawn, the right angles E B D and F D H
will be equal. Wherefore, seeing E F and B D are parallel, the angles E
B A and F D C will be equal. Now if D C be not equal to B A, let any
other strait line equal to B A be drawn from the point D; which, seeing
it cannot fall upon the point C, let it fall upon G. Wherefore A G will
be either greater or less than B D; and therefore the angles E B A and F
D C are not equal, as was supposed. Wherefore A B and C D are equal;
which is the first.

Again, because they make equal angles with the perpendiculars B E and D
F; therefore the angle C D H will be equal to the angle A B D, and, by
the definition of parallels, A B and C D will be parallel; which is the
second.

_That plane, which is included both ways within parallel lines, is
called a_ PARALLELOGRAM.

Coroll. I. From this last it follows, that the angles A B D and C D H
are equal, that is, that a strait line, as B H, falling upon two
parallels, as A B and C D, makes the internal angle A B D equal to the
external and opposite angle C D H.

Coroll. II. And from hence again it follows, that a strait line falling
upon two parallels, makes the alternate angles equal, that is, the angle
A G F, in the fourth figure, equal to the angle G F D. For seeing G F D
is equal to the external opposite angle E G B, it will be also equal to
its vertical angle A G F, which is alternate to G F D.

Coroll. III. That the internal angles on the same side of the line F G
are equal to two right angles. For the angles at F, namely, G F C and G
F D, are equal to two right angles. But G F D is equal to its alternate
angle A G F. Wherefore both the angles G F C and A G F, which are
internal on the same side of the line F G, are equal to two right
angles.

Coroll. IV. That the three angles of a strait-lined plain triangle are
equal to two right angles; and any side being produced, the external
angle will be equal to the two opposite internal angles. For if there be
drawn by the vertex of the plain triangle A B C (fig. 5) a parallel to
any of the sides, as to A B, the angles A and B will be equal to their
alternate angles E and F, and the angle C is common. But, by the 10th
article, the three angles E, C and F, are equal to two right angles; and
therefore the three angles of the triangle are equal to the same; which
is the first. Again, the two angles B and D are equal to two right
angles, by the 10th article. Wherefore taking away B, there will remain
the angles A and C, equal to the angle D; which is the second.

Coroll. V. If the angles A and B be equal, the sides A C and C B will
also be equal, because A B and E F are parallel; and, on the contrary,
if the sides A C and C B be equal, the angles A and B will also be
equal. For if they be not equal, let the angles B and G be equal.
Wherefore, seeing G B and E F are parallels, and the angles G and B
equal, the sides G C and C B will also be equal; and because C B and A C
are equal by supposition, C G and C A will also be equal; which cannot
be, by the 11th article.

Coroll. VI. From hence it is manifest, that if two radii of a circle be
connected by a strait line, the angles they make with that connecting
line will be equal to one another; and if there be added that segment of
the circle, which is subtended by the same line which connects the
radii, then the angles, which those radii make with the circumference,
will also be equal to one another. For a strait line, which subtends any
arch, makes equal angles with the same; because, if the arch and the
subtense be divided in the middle, the two halves of the segment will be
congruous to one another, by reason of the uniformity both of the
circumference of the circle, and of the strait line.

[Sidenote: The circumferences of circles are to one another as their
           diameters are.]

13. Perimeters of circles are to one another, as their semidiameters
are. For let there be any two circles, as, in the first figure, B C D
the greater, and E F G the lesser, having their common centre at A; and
let their semidiameters be A C and A E. I say, A C has the same
proportion to A E, which the perimeter B C D has to the perimeter E F G.
For the magnitude of the semidiameters A C and A E is determined by the
distance of the points C and E from the centre A; and the same distances
are acquired by the uniform motion of a point from A to C, in such
manner, that in equal times the distances acquired be equal. But the
perimeters B C D and E F G are also determined by the same distances of
the points C and E from the centre A; and therefore the perimeters B C D
and E F G, as well as the semidiameters A C and A E, have their
magnitudes determined by the same cause, which cause makes, in equal
times, equal spaces. Wherefore, by the 13th chapter and 6th article, the
perimeters of circles and their semidiameters are proportionals; which
was to be proved.

[Sidenote: In triangles strait lines parallel to the bases are to one
           another, as the parts of the sides which they cut off from
           the vertex.]

14. If two strait lines, which constitute an angle, be cut by
strait-lined parallels, the intercepted parallels will be to one
another, as the parts which they cut off from the vertex. Let the strait
lines A B and A C, in the 6th figure, make an angle at A, and be cut by
the two strait-lined parallels B C and D E, so that the parts cut off
from the vertex in either of those lines, as in A B, may be A B and A D.
I say, the parallels B C and D E are to one another, as the parts A B
and A D. For let A B be divided into any number of equal parts, as into
A F, F D, D B; and by the points F and D, let F G and D E be drawn
parallel to the base B C, and cut A C in G and E; and again, by the
points G and E, let other strait lines be drawn parallel to A B, and cut
B C in H and I. If now the point A be understood to be moved uniformly
over A B, and in the same time B be moved to C, and all the points F, D,
and B be moved uniformly and with equal swiftness over F G, D E, and B
C; then shall B pass over B H, equal to F G, in the same time that A
passes over A F; and A F and F G will be to one another, as their
velocities are; and when A is in F, D will be in K; when A is in D, D
will be in E; and in what manner the point A passes by the points F, D,
and B, in the same manner the point B will pass by the points H, I, and
C; and the strait lines F G, D K, K E, B H, H I, and I C, are equal, by
reason of their parallelism; and therefore, as the velocity in A B is to
the velocity in B C, so is A D to D E; but as the velocity in A B is to
the velocity in B C, so is A B to B C; that is to say, all the parallels
will be severally to all the parts cut off from the vertex, as A F is to
F G. Wherefore, A F. G F :: A D. D E :: A B. B C are proportionals.

The subtenses of equal angles in different circles, as the strait lines
B C and F E (in fig. 1), are to one another as the arches which they
subtend. For (by art. 8) the arches of equal angles are to one another
as their perimeters are; and (by art. 13) the perimeters as their
semidiameters; but the subtenses B C and F E are parallel to one another
by reason of the equality of the angles which they make with the
semidiameters; and therefore the same subtenses, by the last precedent
article, will be proportional to the semidiameters, that is, to the
perimeters, that is, to the arches which they subtend.

[Sidenote: By what fraction of a strait line the circumference of a
           circle is made.]

15. If in a circle any number of equal subtenses be placed immediately
after one another, and strait lines be drawn from the extreme point of
the first subtense to the extreme points of all the rest, the first
subtense being produced will make with the second subtense an external
angle double to that, which is made by the same first subtense, and a
tangent to the circle touching it in the extreme points thereof; and if
a strait line which subtends two of those arches be produced, it will
make an external angle with the third subtense, triple to the angle
which is made by the tangent with the first subtense; and so
continually. For with the radius A B (in fig. 7) let a circle be
described, and in it let any number of equal subtenses, B C, C D, and D
E, be placed; also let B D and B E be drawn; and by producing B C, B D
and B E to any distance in G, H and I, let them make angles with the
subtenses which succeed one another, namely, the external angles G C D,
and H D E. Lastly, let the tangent K B be drawn, making with the first
subtense the angle K B C. I say the angle G C D is double to the angle K
B C, and the angle H D E triple to the same angle K B C. For if A C be
drawn cutting B D in M, and from the point C there be drawn L C
perpendicular to the same A C, then C L and M D will be parallel, by
reason of the right angles at C and M; and therefore the alterne angles
L C D and B D C will be equal: as also the angles B D C and C B D will
be equal, because of the equality of the strait lines B C and C D.
Wherefore the angle G C D is double to either of the angles C B D or C D
B; and therefore also the angle G C D is double to the angle L C D, that
is, to the angle K B C. Again, C D is parallel to B E, by reason of the
equality of the angles C B E and D E B, and of the strait lines C B and
D E; and therefore the angles G C D and G B E are equal; and
consequently G B E, as also D E B is double to the angle K B C. But the
external angle H D E is equal to the two internal D E B and D B E; and
therefore the angle H D E is triple to the angle K B C, &c.; which was
to be proved.

Coroll. I. From hence it is manifest, that the angles K B C and C B D,
as also, that all the angles that are comprehended by two strait lines
meeting in the circumference of a circle and insisting upon equal
arches, are equal to one another.

Coroll. II. If the tangent B K be moved in the circumference with
uniform motion about the centre B, it will in equal times cut off equal
arches; and will pass over the whole perimeter in the same time in which
itself describes a semiperimeter about the centre B.

Coroll. III. From hence also we may understand, what it is that
determines the bending or curvation of a strait line into the
circumference of a circle; namely, that it is fraction continually
increasing in the same manner, as numbers, from one upwards, increase by
the continual addition of unity. For the indefinite strait line K B
being broken in B according to any angle, as that of K B C, and again in
C according to a double angle, and in D according to an angle which is
triple, and in E according to an angle which is quadruple to the first
angle, and so continually, there will be described a figure which will
indeed be rectilineal, if the broken parts be considered as having
magnitude; but if they be understood to be the least that can be, that
is, as so many points, then the figure described will not be
rectilineal, but a circle, whose circumference will be the broken line.

Coroll. IV. From what has been said in this present article, it may also
be demonstrated, that an angle in the centre is double to an angle in
the circumference of the same circle, if the intercepted arches be
equal. For seeing that strait line, by whose motion an angle is
determined, passes over equal arches in equal times, as well from the
centre as from the circumference; and while that, which is from the
circumference, is passing over half its own perimeter, it passes in the
same time over the whole perimeter of that which is from the centre, the
arches, which it cuts off in the perimeter whose centre is A, will be
double to those, which it makes in its own semiperimeter, whose centre
is B. But in equal circles, as arches are to one another, so also are
angles.

It may also be demonstrated, that the external angle made by a subtense
produced and the next equal subtense is equal to an angle from the
centre insisting upon the same arch; as in the last diagram, the angle G
C D is equal to the angle C A D; for the external angle G C D is double
to the angle C B D; and the angle C A D insisting upon the same arch C D
is also double to the same angle C B D or K B C.

[Sidenote: That an angle of contingence is quantity, but of a different
           kind from that of an angle simply so called; and that it can
           neither add nor take away anything from the same.]

16. An angle of contingence, if it be compared with an angle simply so
called, how little soever, has such proportion to it as a point has to a
line; that is, no proportion at all, nor any quantity. For first, an
angle of contingence is made by continual flexion; so that in the
generation of it there is no circular motion at all, in which consists
the nature of an angle simply so called; and therefore it cannot be
compared with it according to quantity. Secondly, seeing the external
angle made by a subtense produced and the next subtense is equal to an
angle from the centre insisting upon the same arch, as in the last
figure the angle G C D is equal to the angle C A D, the angle of
contingence will be equal to that angle from the centre, which is made
by A B and the same A B; for no part of a tangent can subtend any arch;
but as the point of contact is to be taken for the subtense, so the
angle of contingence is to be accounted for the external angle, and
equal to that angle whose arch is the same point B.

Now, seeing an angle in general is defined to be the opening or
divergence of two lines, which concur in one sole point; and seeing one
opening is greater than another, it cannot be denied, but that by the
very generation of it, an angle of contingence is quantity; for
wheresoever there is greater and less, there is also quantity; but this
quantity consists in greater and less flexion; for how much the greater
a circle is, so much the nearer comes the circumference of it to the
nature of a strait line; for the circumference of a circle being made by
the curvation of a strait line, the less that strait line is, the
greater is the curvation; and therefore, when one strait line is a
tangent to many circles, the angle of contingence, which it makes with a
less circle, is greater than that which it makes with a greater circle.

Nothing therefore is added to or taken from an angle simply so called,
by the addition to it or taking from it of never so many angles of
contingence. And as an angle of one sort can never be equal to an angle
of the other sort, so they cannot be either greater or less than one
another.

From whence it follows, that an angle of a segment, that is, the angle,
which any strait line makes with any arch, is equal to the angle which
is made by the same strait line, and another which touches the circle in
the point of their concurrence; as in the last figure, the angle which
is made between G B and B K is equal to that which is made between G B
and the arch B C.

[Sidenote: That the inclination of planes is angle simply so called.]

17. An angle, which is made by two planes, is commonly called the
inclination of those planes; and because planes have equal inclination
in all their parts, instead of their inclination an angle is taken,
which is made by two strait lines, one of which is in one, the other in
the other of those planes, but both perpendicular to the common section.

[Sidenote: A solid angle what it is.]

18. A solid angle may be conceived two ways. First, for the aggregate of
all the angles, which are made by the motion of a strait line, while one
extreme point thereof remaining fixed, it is carried about any plain
figure, in which the fixed point of the strait line is not contained.
And in this sense, it seems to be understood by Euclid. Now it is
manifest, that the quantity of a solid angle so conceived is no other,
than the aggregate of all the angles in a superficies so described, that
is, in the superficies of a pyramidal solid. Secondly, when a pyramis or
cone has its vertex in the centre of a sphere, a solid angle may be
understood to be the proportion of a spherical superficies subtending
that vertex to the whole superficies of the sphere. In which sense,
solid angles are to one another as the spherical bases of solids, which
have their vertex in the centre of the same sphere.

[Sidenote: What is the nature of asymptotes.]

19. All the ways, by which two lines respect one another, or all the
variety of their position, may be comprehended under four kinds; for any
two lines whatsoever are either parallels, or being produced, if need
be, or moved one of them to the other parallelly to itself, they make an
angle; or else, by the like production and motion, they touch one
another; or lastly, they are _asymptotes_. The nature of parallels,
angles, and tangents, has been already declared. It remains that I speak
briefly of the nature of asymptotes.

Asymptosy depends upon this, that quantity is infinitely divisible. And
from hence it follows, that any line being given, and a body supposed to
be moved from one extreme thereof towards the other, it is possible, by
taking degrees of velocity always less and less, in such proportion as
the parts of the line are made less by continual division, that the same
body may be always moved forwards in that line, and yet never reach the
end of it. For it is manifest, that if any strait line, as A F, (in the
8th figure) be cut anywhere in B, and again B F be cut in C, and C F in
D, and D F in E, and so eternally, and there be drawn from the point F,
the strait line F F at any angle A F F; and lastly, if the strait lines
A F, B F, C F, D F, E F, &c., having the same proportion to one another
with the segments of the line A F, be set in order and parallel to the
same A F, the crooked line A B C D E, and the strait line F F, will be
_asymptotes_, that is, they will always come nearer and nearer together,
but never touch one another. Now, because any line may be cut eternally
according to the proportions which the segments have to one another,
therefore the divers kinds of asymptotes are infinite in number, and not
necessary to be further spoken of in this place. In the nature of
asymptotes in general there is no more, than that they come still nearer
and nearer, but never touch. But in special in the asymptosy of
hyperbolic lines, it is understood they should approach to a distance
less than any given quantity.

[Sidenote: Situation, by what it is determined.]

20. SITUATION _is the relation of one place to another_; and where there
are many places, their situation is determined by four things; by _their
distances from one another_; by _several distances from a place
assigned_; by _the order of strait lines drawn from a place assigned to
the places of them all_; and by _the angles which are made by the lines
so drawn_. For if their distances, order, and angles, be given, that is,
be certainly known, their several places will also be so certainly
known, as that they can be no other.

[Sidenote: What is like situation; what is figure; and what are like
           figures.]

21. Points, how many soever they be, have _like situation_ with an equal
number of other points, when all the strait lines, that are drawn from
some one point to all these, have severally the same proportion to
those, that are drawn in the same order and at equal angles from some
one point to all those. For let there be any number of points as A, B,
and C, (in the 9th figure) to which from some one point D let the strait
lines D A, D B, and D C be drawn; and let there be an equal number of
other points, as E, F, and G, and from some point H let the strait lines
H E, H F, and H G be drawn, so that the angles A D B and B D C be
severally and in the same order equal to the angles E H F and F H G, and
the strait lines D A, D B, and D C proportional to the strait lines H E,
H F, and H G; I say, the three points A, B, and C, have like situation
with the three points E, F, and G, or are placed alike. For if H E be
understood to be laid upon D A, so that the point H be in D, the point F
will be in the strait line D B, by reason of the equality of the angles
A D B and E H F; and the point G will be in the strait line D C, by
reason of the equality of the angles B D C and F H G; and the strait
lines A B and E F, as also B C and F G, will be parallel, because A D. E
H :: B D. F H :: C D. G H are proportionals by construction; and
therefore the distances between the points A and B, and the points B and
C, will be proportional to the distances between the points E and F, and
the points F and G. Wherefore, in the situation of the points A, B, and
C, and the situation of the points E, F and G, the angles in the same
order are equal; so that their situations differ in nothing but the
inequality of their distances from one another, and of their distances
from the points D and H. Now, in both the orders of points, those
inequalities are equal; for A B. B C :: E F. F G, which are their
distances from one another, as also D A. D B. D C :: H E. H F. H G,
which are their distances from the assumed points D and H, are
proportionals. Their difference, therefore, consists solely in the
magnitude of their distances. But, by the definition of _like_, (chapter
I. article 2) those things, which differ only in magnitude, are like.
Wherefore the points A, B, and C, have to one another like situation
with the points E, F, and G, or are placed alike; which was to be
proved.

FIGURE _is quantity, determined by the situation or placing of all its
extreme points_. Now I call those points extreme, which are contiguous
to the place which is without the figure. In lines therefore and
superficies, all points may be called extreme; but in solids only those
which are in the superficies that includes them.

_Like figures_ are those, whose extreme points in one of them are all
placed like all the extreme points in the other; for such figures differ
in nothing but magnitude.

And like figures are _alike placed_, when in both of them the homologal
strait lines, that is, the strait lines which connect the points which
answer one another, are parallel, and have their proportional sides
inclined the same way.

And seeing every strait line is like every other strait line, and every
plane like every other plane, when nothing but planeness is considered;
if the lines, which include planes, or the superficies, which include
solids, have their proportions known, it will not be hard to know
whether any figure be like or unlike to another propounded figure.

And thus much concerning the _first grounds of philosophy_. The next
place belongs to _geometry_; in which the quantities of figures are
sought out from the proportions of lines and angles. Wherefore it is
necessary for him, that would study geometry, to know first what is the
nature of quantity, proportion, angle and figure. Having therefore
explained these in the three last chapters, I thought fit to add them to
this part; and so pass to the next.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  _Vol. 1. Lat. & Eng._
  C. XIV.
  _Fig. 1-10_
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PART III

                         PROPORTIONS OF MOTIONS
                            AND MAGNITUDES.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XV.

                 OF THE NATURE, PROPERTIES, AND DIVERS
                      CONSIDERATIONS OF MOTION AND
                               ENDEAVOUR.

1.. Repetition of some principles of the doctrine of motion formerly set
    down.—2. Other principles added to them.—3. Certain theorems
    concerning the nature of motion.—4. Divers considerations of
    motion.—5. The way by which the first endeavour of bodies moved
    tendeth.—6. In motion which is made by concourse, one of the movents
    ceasing, the endeavour is made by the way by which the rest tend.—7.
    All endeavour is propagated in infinitum.—8. How much greater the
    velocity or magnitude is of a movent, so much the greater is the
    efficacy thereof upon any other body in its way.


[Sidenote: Repetition of some principles of the doctrine of motion
           formerly set down.]

1. The next things in order to be treated of are MOTION and MAGNITUDE,
which are the most common accidents of all bodies. This place therefore
most properly belongs to the elements of geometry. But because this part
of philosophy, having been improved by the best wits of all ages, has
afforded greater plenty of matter than can well be thrust together
within the narrow limits of this discourse, I thought fit to admonish
the reader, that before he proceed further, he take into his hands the
works of Euclid, Archimedes, Apollonius, and other as well ancient as
modern writers. For to what end is it, to do over again that which is
already done? The little therefore that I shall say concerning geometry
in some of the following chapters, shall be such only as is new, and
conducing to natural philosophy.

I have already delivered some of the principles of this doctrine in the
eighth and ninth chapters; which I shall briefly put together here, that
the reader in going on may have their light nearer at hand.

First, therefore, in chap. VIII. art. 10, _motion_ is defined to be _the
continual privation of one place, and acquisition of another_.

Secondly, it is there shown, that _whatsoever is moved is moved in
time_.

Thirdly, in the same chapter, art. 11, I have defined _rest to be when a
body remains for some time in one place_.

Fourthly, it is there shown, that _whatsoever is moved is not in any
determined place_; as also that the same _has been moved, is still
moved, and will yet be moved_; so that in every part of that space, in
which motion is made, we may consider three times, namely, the _past_,
the _present_, and _future time_.

Fifthly, in art. 15 of the same chapter, I have defined _velocity_ or
_swiftness to be motion considered as power, namely, that power by which
a body moved may in a certain time transmit a certain length_; which
also may more briefly be enunciated thus, _velocity is the quantity of
motion determined by time and line_.

Sixthly, in the same chapter, art. 16, I have shown that _motion is the
measure of time_.

Seventhly, in the same chapter, art. 17, I have defined motions to be
equally swift, when in equal times equal lengths are transmitted by
them.

Eighthly, in art. 18 of the same chapter, _motions_ are defined to be
_equal, when the swiftness of one moved body, computed in every part of
its magnitude, is equal to the swiftness of another, computed also in
every part of its magnitude_. From whence it is to be noted, that
_motions equal to one another, and motions equally swift_, do not
signify the same thing; for when two horses draw abreast, the motion of
both is greater than the motion of either of them singly; but the
swiftness of both together is but equal to that of either.

Ninthly, in art. 19 of the same chapter, I have shown, that _whatsoever
is at rest will always be at rest, unless there be some other body
besides it, which by getting into its place suffers it no longer to
remain at rest_. And that _whatsoever is moved, will always be moved,
unless there be some other body besides it, which hinders its motion_.

Tenthly, in chap. IX. art. 7, I have demonstrated, that _when any body
is moved which was formerly at rest, the immediate efficient cause of
that motion is in some other moved and contiguous body_.

Eleventhly, I have shown in the same place, that _whatsoever is moved,
will always be moved in the same way, and with the same swiftness, if it
be not hindered by some other moved and contiguous body_.

[Sidenote: Other principles
           added to them.]

2. To which principles I shall here add those that follow. First, I
define ENDEAVOUR _to be motion made in less space and time than can be
given_; that is, _less than can be determined or assigned by exposition
or number_; that is, _motion made through the length of a point, and in
an instant or point of time_. For the explaining of which definition it
must be remembered, that by a point is not to be understood that which
has no quantity, or which cannot by any means be divided; for there is
no such thing in nature; but that, whose quantity is not at all
considered, that is, whereof neither quantity nor any part is computed
in demonstration; so that a point is not to be taken for an indivisible,
but for an undivided thing; as also an instant is to be taken for an
undivided, and not for an indivisible time.

In like manner, endeavour is to be conceived as motion; but so as that
neither the quantity of the time in which, nor of the line in which it
is made, may in demonstration be at all brought into comparison with the
quantity of that time, or of that line of which it is a part. And yet,
as a point may be compared with a point, so one endeavour may be
compared with another endeavour, and one may be found to be greater or
less than another. For if the vertical points of two angles be compared,
they will be equal or unequal in the same proportion which the angles
themselves have to one another. Or if a strait line cut many
circumferences of concentric circles, the inequality of the points of
intersection will be in the same proportion which the perimeters have to
one another. And in the same manner, if two motions begin and end both
together, their endeavours will be equal or unequal, according to the
proportion of their velocities; as we see a bullet of lead descend with
greater endeavour than a ball of wool.

Secondly, I define IMPETUS, _or quickness of motion, to be the swiftness
or velocity of the body moved, but considered in the several points of
that time in which it is moved. In which sense_ impetus _is nothing else
but the quantity or velocity of endeavour. But considered with the whole
time, it is the whole velocity of the body moved taken together
throughout all the time, and equal to the product of a line representing
the time, multiplied into a line representing the arithmetically mean_
impetus _or quickness_. Which arithmetical mean, what it is, is defined
in the 29th article of chapter XIII.

And because in equal times the ways that are passed are as the
velocities, and the _impetus_ is the velocity they go withal, reckoned
in all the several points of the times, it followeth that during any
time whatsoever, howsoever the _impetus_ be increased or decreased, the
length of the way passed over shall be increased or decreased in the
same proportion; and the same line shall represent both the way of the
body moved, and the several _impetus_ or degrees of swiftness wherewith
the way is passed over.

And if the body moved be not a point, but a strait line moved so as that
every point thereof make a several strait line, the plane described by
its motion, whether uniform, accelerated, or retarded, shall be greater
or less, the time being the same, in the same proportion with that of
the _impetus_ reckoned in one motion to the _impetus_ reckoned in the
other. For the reason is the same in parallelograms and their sides.

For the same cause also, if the body moved be a plane, the solid
described shall be still greater or less in the proportions of the
several _impetus_ or quicknesses reckoned through one line, to the
several _impetus_ reckoned through another.

This understood, let A B C D, (in figure 1, chap. XVII.) be a
parallelogram; in which suppose the side A B to be moved parallelly to
the opposite side C D, decreasing all the way till it vanish in the
point C, and so describing the figure A B E F C; the point B, as A B
decreaseth, will therefore describe the line B E F C; and suppose the
time of this motion designed by the line C D; and in the same time C D,
suppose the side A C to be moved parallel and uniformly to B D. From the
point O taken at adventure in the line C D, draw O R parallel to B D,
cutting the line B E F C in E, and the side A B in R. And again, from
the point Q taken also at adventure in the line C D, draw Q S parallel
to B D, cutting the line B E F C in F, and the side A B in S; and draw E
G and F H parallel to C D, cutting A C in G and H. Lastly, suppose the
same construction done in all the points possible of the line B E F C. I
say, that as the proportions of the swiftness wherewith Q F, O E, D B,
and all the rest supposed to be drawn parallel to D B and terminated in
the line B E F C, are to the proportions of their several times designed
by the several parallels H F, G E, A B, and all the rest supposed to be
drawn parallel to the line of time C D and terminated in the line B E F
C, the aggregate to the aggregate, so is the area or plane D B E F C to
the area or plane A C F E B. For as A B decreasing continually by the
line B E F C vanisheth in the time C D into the point C, so in the same
time the line D C continually decreasing vanisheth by the same line C F
E B into the point B; and the point D describeth in that decreasing
motion the line D B equal to the line A C described by the point A in
the decreasing motion of A B; and their swiftnesses are therefore equal.
Again, because in the time G E the point O describeth the line OE, and
in the same time the point S describeth the line S E, the line O E shall
be to the line SE, as the swiftness wherewith OE is described to the
swiftness wherewith SE is described. In like manner, because in the same
time H F the point Q describeth the line Q F, and the point R the line R
F, it shall be as the swiftness by which Q F is described to the
swiftness by which R F is described, so the line itself Q F to the line
itself R F; and so in all the lines that can possibly be drawn parallel
to B D in the points where they cut the line B E F C. But all the
parallels to B D, as S E, R F, A C, and the rest that can possibly be
drawn from the line A B to the line B E F C, make the area of the plane
A B E F C; and all the parallels to the same B D, as Q F, O E, D B and
the rest drawn to the points where they cut the same line B E F C, make
the area of the plane B E F C D. As therefore the aggregate of the
swiftnesses wherewith the plane B E F C D is described, is to the
aggregate of the swiftnesses wherewith the plane A C F E B is described,
so is the plane itself B E F C D to the plane itself A C F E B. But the
aggregate of the times represented by the parallels A B, G E, H F and
the rest, maketh also the area A C F E B. And therefore, as the
aggregate of all the lines Q F, O E, D B and all the rest of the lines
parallel to B D and terminated in the line B E F C, is to the aggregate
of all the lines H F, G E, A B and all the rest of the lines parallel to
C D and terminated in the same line B E F C; that is, as the aggregate
of the lines of swiftness to the aggregate of the lines of time, or as
the whole swiftness in the parallels to D B to the whole time in the
parallels to C D, so is the plane B E F C D to the plane A C F E B. And
the proportions of Q F to F H, and of O E to E G, and of D B to B A, and
so of all the rest taken together, are the proportions of the plane D B
E F C to the plane A B E F C. But the lines Q F, O E, D B and the rest
are the lines that design the swiftness; and the lines H F, G E, A B and
the rest are the lines that design the times of the motions; and
therefore the proportion of the plane D B E F C to the plane A B E F C
is the proportion of all the velocities taken together to all the times
taken together. Wherefore, as the proportions of the swiftnesses, &c.;
which was to be demonstrated.

The same holds also in the diminution of the circles, whereof the lines
of time are the semidiameters, as may easily be conceived by imagining
the whole plane A B C D turned round upon the axis B D; for the line B E
F C will be everywhere in the superficies so made, and the lines H F, G
E, A B, which are here parallelograms, will be there cylinders, the
diameters of whose bases are the lines H F, G E, A B, &c. and the
altitude a point, that is to say, a quantity less than any quantity that
can possibly be named; and the lines Q F, O E, D B, &c. small solids
whose lengths and breadths are less than any quantity that can be named.

But this is to be noted, that unless the proportion of the sum of the
swiftnesses to the proportion of the sum of the times be determined, the
proportion of the figure D B E F C to the figure A B E F C cannot be
determined.

Thirdly, I define RESISTANCE _to be the endeavour of one moved body
either wholly or in part contrary to the endeavour of another moved
body, which toucheth the same_. I say, wholly contrary, when the
endeavour of two bodies proceeds in the same strait line from the
opposite extremes, and contrary in part, when two bodies have their
endeavour in two lines, which, proceeding from the extreme points of a
strait line, meet without the same.

Fourthly, that I may define what it is to PRESS, I say, that _of two
moved bodies one presses the other, when with its endeavour it makes
either all or part of the other body to go out of its place_.

Fifthly, _a body, which is pressed and not wholly removed, is said to_
RESTORE _itself, when, the pressing body being taken away, the parts
which were moved do, by reason of the internal constitution of the
pressed body, return every one into its own place_. And this we may
observe in springs, in blown bladders, and in many other bodies, whose
parts yield more or less to the endeavour which the pressing body makes
at the first arrival; but afterwards, when the pressing body is removed,
they do, by some force within them, _restore_ themselves, and give their
whole body the same figure it had before.

Sixthly, I define FORCE _to be the_ impetus _or quickness of motion
multiplied either into itself, or into the magnitude of the movent, by
means whereof the said movent works more or less upon the body that
resists it_.

[Sidenote: Certain theorems concerning the nature of motion.]

3. Having premised thus much, I shall now demonstrate, first, that if a
point moved come to touch another point which is at rest, how little
soever the impetus or quickness of its motion be, it shall move that
other point. For if by that impetus it do not at all move it out of its
place, neither shall it move it with double the same impetus. For
nothing doubled is still nothing; and for the same reason it shall never
move it with that impetus, how many times soever it be multiplied,
because nothing, however it be multiplied, will for ever be nothing.
Wherefore, when a point is at rest, if it do not yield to the least
impetus, it will yield to none; and consequently it will be impossible
that that, which is at rest, should ever be moved.

Secondly, that when a point moved, how little soever the impetus thereof
be, falls upon a point of any body at rest, how hard soever that body
be, it will at the first touch make it yield a little. For if it do not
yield to the impetus which is in that point, neither will it yield to
the impetus of never so many points, which have all their impetus
severally equal to the impetus of that point. For seeing all those
points together work equally, if any one of them have no effect, the
aggregate of them all together shall have no effect as many times told
as there are points in the whole body, that is, still no effect at all;
and by consequent there would be some bodies so hard that it would be
impossible to break them; that is, a finite hardness, or a finite force,
would not yield to that which is infinite; which is absurd.

Coroll. It is therefore manifest, that rest does nothing at all, nor is
of any efficacy; and that nothing but motion gives motion to such things
as be at rest, and takes it from things moved.

Thirdly, that cessation in the movent does not cause cessation in that
which was moved by it. For (by number 11 of art. 1 of this chapter)
whatsoever is moved perseveres in the same way and with the same
swiftness, as long as it is not hindered by something that is moved
against it. Now it is manifest, that cessation is not contrary motion;
and therefore it follows that the standing still of the movent does not
make it necessary that the thing moved should also stand still.

Coroll. They are therefore deceived, that reckon the taking away of the
impediment or resistance for one of the causes of motion.

[Sidenote: Divers considerations of motions.]

4. Motion is brought into account for divers respects; first, as in a
body _undivided_, that is, considered as a point; or, as in a _divided_
body. In an undivided body, when we suppose the way, by which the motion
is made, to be a line; and in a divided body, when we compute the motion
of the several parts of that body, as of parts.

Secondly, from the diversity of the regulation of motion, it is in body,
considered as undivided. sometimes _uniform_ and sometimes _multiform_.
_Uniform_ is that by which equal lines are always transmitted in equal
times; and _multiform_, when in one time more, in another time less
space is transmitted. Again, of multiform motions, there are some in
which the degrees of acceleration and retardation proceed in the same
proportions, which the spaces transmitted have, whether duplicate, or
triplicate, or by whatsoever number multiplied; and others in which it
is otherwise.

Thirdly, from the number of the movents; that is, one motion is made by
one movent only, and another by the concourse of many movents.

Fourthly, from the position of that line in which a body is moved, in
respect of some other line; and from hence one motion is called
_perpendicular_, another _oblique_, another _parallel_.

Fifthly, from the position of the movent in respect of the moved body;
from whence one motion is _pulsion_ or driving, another _traction_ or
drawing. _Pulsion_, when the movent makes the moved body go before it;
and _traction_, when it makes it follow. Again, there are two sorts of
_pulsion_; one, when the motions of the movent and moved body begin both
together, which may be called _trusion_ or _thrusting_ and _vection_;
the other, when the movent is first moved, and afterwards the moved
body, which motion is called _percussion_ or _stroke_.

Sixthly, motion is considered sometimes from the effect only which the
movent works in the moved body, which is usually called _moment_. Now
_moment is the excess of motion which the movent has above the motion or
endeavour of the resisting body_.

Seventhly, it may be considered from the diversity of the _medium_; as
one motion may be made in _vacuity_ or _empty place_; another in a
_fluid_; another in a _consistent medium_, that is, a _medium_ whose
parts are by some power so _consistent_ and _cohering_, that no part of
the same will yield to the movent, unless the whole yield also.

Eighthly, when a moved body is considered as having parts, there arises
another distinction of motion into _simple_ and _compound_. _Simple_,
when all the several parts describe several equal lines; _compounded_,
when the lines described are unequal.

[Sidenote: The way by which the first endeavour of bodies moved
           tendeth.]

5. All endeavour tends towards that part, that is to say, in that way
which is determined by the motion of the movent, if the movent be but
one; or, if there be many movents, in that way which their concourse
determines. For example, if a moved body have direct motion, its first
endeavour will be in a strait line; if it have circular motion, its
first endeavour will be in the circumference of a circle.

[Sidenote: In motion, which it made by concourse, one of the movents
           ceasing, the endeavour is made by the way by which the rest
           tend.]

6. And whatsoever the line be, in which a body has its motion from the
concourse of two movents, as soon as in any point thereof the force of
one of the movents ceases, there immediately the former endeavour of
that body will be changed into an endeavour in the line of the other
movent.

Wherefore, when any body is carried on by the concourse of two winds,
one of those winds ceasing, the endeavour and motion of that body will
be in that line, in which it would have been carried by that wind alone
which blows still. And in the describing of a circle, where that which
is moved has its motion determined by a movent in a tangent, and by the
radius which keeps it in a certain distance from the centre, if the
retention of the radius cease, that endeavour, which was in the
circumference of the circle, will now be in the tangent, that is, in a
strait line. For, seeing endeavour is computed in a less part of the
circumference than can be given, that is, in a point, the way by which a
body is moved in the circumference is compounded of innumerable strait
lines, of which every one is less than can be given; which are therefore
called points. Wherefore when any body, which is moved in the
circumference of a circle, is freed from the retention of the radius, it
will proceed in one of those strait lines, that is, in a tangent.

[Sidenote: All endeavour is propagated in infinitum.]

7. All endeavour, whether strong or weak, is propagated to infinite
distance; for it is motion. If therefore the first endeavour of a body
be made in space which is empty, it will always proceed with the same
velocity; for it cannot be supposed that it can receive any resistance
at all from empty space; and therefore, (by art. 7, chap, IX) it will
always proceed in the same way and with the same swiftness. And if its
endeavour be in space which is filled, yet, seeing endeavour is motion,
that which stands next in its way shall be removed, and endeavour
further, and again remove that which stands next, and so infinitely.
Wherefore the propagation of endeavour, from one part of full space to
another, proceeds infinitely. Besides, it reaches in any instant to any
distance, how great soever. For in the same instant in which the first
part of the full _medium_ removes that which is next it, the second also
removes that part which is next to it; and therefore all endeavour,
whether it be in empty or in full space, proceeds not only to any
distance, how great soever, but also in any time, how little soever,
that is, in an instant. Nor makes it any matter, that endeavour, by
proceeding, grows weaker and weaker, till at last it can no longer be
perceived by sense; for motion may be insensible; and I do not here
examine things by sense and experience, but by reason.

[Sidenote: How much greater the velocity or magnitude is of a movent, so
           much the greater is the efficacy thereof upon any other body
           in its way.]

8. When two movents are of equal magnitude, the swifter of them works
with greater force than the slower, upon a body that resists their
motion. Also, if two movents have equal velocity, the greater of them
works with more force than the less. For where the magnitude is equal,
the movent of greater velocity makes the greater impression upon that
body upon which it falls; and where the velocity is equal, the movent of
greater magnitude falling upon the same point, or an equal part of
another body, loses less of its velocity, because the resisting body
works only upon that part of the movent which it touches, and therefore
abates the impetus of that part only; whereas in the mean time the
parts, which are not touched, proceed, and retain their whole force,
till they also come to be touched; and their force has some effect.
Wherefore, for example, in batteries a longer than a shorter piece of
timber of the same thickness and velocity, and a thicker than a
slenderer piece of the same length and velocity, work a greater effect
upon the wall.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XVI.

                 OF MOTION ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM, AND
                        OF MOTION BY CONCOURSE.

1. The velocity of any body, in what time soever it be computed, is that
    which is made of the multiplication of the impetus, or quickness of
    its motion into the time.—2-5. In all motion, the lengths which are
    passed through are to one another, as the products made by the
    impetus multiplied into the time.—6. If two bodies be moved with
    uniform motion through two lengths, the proportion of those lengths
    to one another will be compounded of the proportions of time to
    time, and impetus to impetus, directly taken.—7. If two bodies pass
    through two lengths with uniform motion, the proportion of their
    times to one another will be compounded of the proportions of length
    to length, and impetus to impetus reciprocally taken; also the
    proportion of their impetus to one another will be compounded of the
    proportions of length to length, and time to time reciprocally
    taken.—8. If a body be carried on with uniform motion by two movents
    together, which meet in an angle, the line by which it passes will
    be a strait line, subtending the complement of that angle to two
    right angles.—9, &c. If a body be carried by two movents together,
    one of them being moved with uniform, the other with accelerated
    motion, and the proportion of their lengths to their times being
    explicable in numbers, how to find out what line that body
    describes.


[Sidenote: The velocity of any body, in what time soever it be computed,
           is that which is made of the multiplication of the impetus or
           quickness of its motion into the time.]

1. The velocity of any body, in whatsoever time it be moved, has its
quantity determined by the sum of all the several quicknesses or
impetus, which it hath in the several points of the time of the body's
motion. For seeing velocity, (by the definition of it, chap, VIII, art.
15) is that power by which a body can in a certain time pass through a
certain length; and quickness of motion or impetus, (by chap. XV, art.
2, num. 2) is velocity taken in one point of time only, all the impetus,
together taken in all the points of time, will be the same thing with
the mean impetus multiplied into the whole time, or which is all one,
will be the velocity of the whole motion.

Coroll. If the impetus be the same in every point, any strait line
representing it may be taken for the measure of time: and the
quicknesses or impetus applied ordinately to any strait line making an
angle with it, and representing the way of the body's motion, will
design a parallelogram which shall represent the velocity of the whole
motion. But if the impetus or quickness of motion begin from rest and
increase uniformly, that is, in the same proportion continually with the
times which are passed, the whole velocity of the motion shall be
represented by a triangle, one side whereof is the whole time, and the
other the greatest impetus acquired in that time; or else by a
parallelogram, one of whose sides is the whole time of motion, and the
other, half the greatest impetus; or lastly, by a parallelogram having
for one side a mean proportional between the whole time and the half of
that time, and for the other side the half of the greatest impetus. For
both these parallelograms are equal to one another, and severally equal
to the triangle which is made of the whole line of time, and of the
greatest acquired impetus; as is demonstrated in the elements of
geometry.

[Sidenote: In all motion, the lengths which are passed through are to
           one another, as the products made by the impetus multiplied
           into time.]

2. In all uniform motions the lengths which are transmitted are to one
another, as the product of the mean impetus multiplied into its time, to
the product of the mean impetus multiplied also into its time.

For let A B (in fig. 1) be the time, and A C the impetus by which any
body passes with uniform motion through the length D E; and in any part
of the time A B, as in the time A F, let another body be moved with
uniform motion, first, with the same impetus A C. This body, therefore,
in the time A F with the impetus A C will pass through the length A F.
Seeing, therefore, when bodies are moved in the same time, and with the
same velocity and impetus in every part of their motion, the proportion
of one length transmitted to another length transmitted, is the same
with that of time to time, it followeth, that the length transmitted in
the time A B with the impetus A C will be to the length transmitted in
the time A F with the same impetus A C, as A B itself is to A F, that
is, as the parallelogram A I is to the parallelogram A H, that is, as
the product of the time A B into the mean impetus A C is to the product
of the time A F into the same impetus A C. Again, let it be supposed
that a body be moved in the time A F, not with the same but with some
other uniform impetus, as A L. Seeing therefore, one of the bodies has
in all the parts of its motion the impetus A C, and the other in like
manner the impetus A L, the length transmitted by the body moved with
the impetus A C will be to the length transmitted by the body moved with
the impetus A L, as A C itself is to A L, that is, as the parallelogram
A H is to the parallelogram F L. Wherefore, by ordinate proportion it
will be, as the parallelogram A I to the parallelogram F L, that is, as
the product of the mean impetus into the time is to the product of the
mean impetus into the time, so the length transmitted in the time A B
with the impetus A C, to the length transmitted in the time A F with the
impetus A L; which was to be demonstrated.

Coroll. Seeing, therefore, in uniform motion, as has been shown, the
lengths transmitted are to one another as the parallelograms which are
made by the multiplication of the mean impetus into the times, that is,
by reason of the equality of the impetus all the way, as the times
themselves, it will also be, by permutation, as time to length, so time
to length; and in general, to this place are applicable all the
properties and transmutations of analogisms, which I have set down and
demonstrated in chapter XIII.

3. In motion begun from rest and uniformly accelerated, that is, where
the impetus increaseth continually according to the proportion of the
times, it will also be, as one product made by the mean impetus
multiplied into the time, to another product made likewise by the mean
impetus multiplied into the time, so the length transmitted in the one
time to the length transmitted in the other time.

For let A B (in fig. 1) represent a time; in the beginning of which time
A, let the impetus be as the point A; but as the time goes on, so let
the impetus increase uniformly, till in the last point of that time A B,
namely in B, the impetus acquired be B I. Again, let A F represent
another time, in whose beginning A, let the impetus be as the point
itself A; but as the time proceeds, so let the impetus increase
uniformly, till in the last point F of the time A F the impetus acquired
be F K; and let D E be the length passed through in the time A B with
impetus uniformly increased. I say, the length D E is to the length
transmitted in the time A F, as the time A B multiplied into the mean of
the impetus increasing through the time A B, is to the time A F
multiplied into the mean of the impetus increasing through the time A F.

For seeing the triangle A B I is the whole velocity of the body moved in
the time A B, till the impetus acquired be B I; and the triangle A F K
the whole velocity of the body moved in the time A F with impetus
increasing till there be acquired the impetus F K; the length D E to the
length acquired in the time A F with impetus increasing from rest in A
till there be acquired the impetus F K, will be as the triangle A B I to
the triangle A F K, that is, if the triangles A B I and A F K be like,
in duplicate proportion of the time A B to the time A F; but if unlike,
in the proportion compounded of the proportions of A B to A F and of B I
to F K. Wherefore, as A B I is to A F K, so let D E be to D P; for so,
the length transmitted in the time A B with impetus increasing to B I,
will be to the length transmitted in the time A F with impetus
increasing to F K, as the triangle A B I is to the triangle A F K; but
the triangle A B I is made by the multiplication of the time A B into
the mean of the impetus increasing to B I; and the triangle A F K is
made by the multiplication of the time A F into the mean of the
_impetus_ increasing to F K; and therefore the length D E which is
transmitted in the time A B with impetus increasing to B I, to the
length D P which is transmitted in the time A F with impetus increasing
to F K, is as the product which is made of the time A B multiplied into
its mean impetus, to the product of the time A F multiplied also into
its mean impetus; which was to be proved.

Coroll. I. In motion uniformly accelerated, the proportion of the
lengths transmitted to that of their times, is compounded of the
proportions of their times to their times, and impetus to impetus.

Coroll. II. In motion uniformly accelerated, the lengths transmitted in
equal times, taken in continual succession from the beginning of motion,
are as the differences of square numbers beginning from unity, namely,
as 3, 5, 7, &c. For if in the first time the length transmitted be as 1,
in the first and second times the length transmitted will be as 4, which
is the square of 2, and in the three first times it will be as 9, which
is the square of 3, and in the four first times as 16, and so on. Now
the differences of these squares are 3, 5, 7, &c.

Coroll. III. In motion uniformly accelerated from rest, the length
transmitted is to another length transmitted uniformly in the same time,
but with such impetus as was acquired by the accelerated motion in the
last point of that time, as a triangle to a parallelogram, which have
their altitude and base common. For seeing the length D E (in fig. 1) is
passed through with velocity as the triangle A B I, it is necessary that
for the passing through of a length which is double to D E, the velocity
be as the parallelogram A I; for the parallelogram A I is double to the
triangle A B I.

4. In motion, which beginning from rest is so aclerated, that the
impetus thereof increases continually in proportion duplicate to the
proportion of the times in which it is made, a length transmitted in one
time will be to a length transmitted in another time, as the product
made by the mean impetus multiplied into the time of one of those
motions, to the product of the mean impetus multiplied into the time of
the other motion.

For let A B (in fig. 2) represent a time, in whose first instant A let
the impetus be as the point A; but as the time proceeds, so let the
impetus increase continually in duplicate proportion to that of the
times, till in the last point of time B the impetus acquired be B I;
then taking the point F anywhere in the time A B, let the impetus F K
acquired in the time A F be ordinately applied to that point F. Seeing
therefore the proportion of F K to B I is supposed to be duplicate to
that of A F to A B, the proportion of A F to A B will be subduplicate to
that of F K to B I; and that of A B to A F will be (by chap. XIII. art.
16) duplicate to that of B I to F K; and consequently the point K will
be in a parabolical line, whose diameter is A B and base B I; and for
the same reason, to what point soever of the time A B the impetus
acquired in that time be ordinately applied, the strait line designing
that impetus will be in the same parabolical line A K I. Wherefore the
mean impetus multiplied into the whole time A B will be the parabola A K
I B, equal to the parallelogram A M, which parallelogram has for one
side the line of time A B and for the other the line of the impetus A L,
which is two-thirds of the impetus B I; for every parabola is equal to
two-thirds of that parallelogram with which it has its altitude and base
common. Wherefore the whole velocity in A B will be the parallelogram A
M, as being made by the multiplication of the impetus A L into the time
A B. And in like manner, if F N be taken, which is two-thirds of the
impetus F K, and the parallelogram F O be completed, F O will be the
whole velocity in the time A F, as being made by the uniform impetus A O
or F N multiplied into the time A F. Let now the length transmitted in
the time A B and with the velocity A M be the strait line D E; and
lastly, let the length transmitted in the time A F with the velocity A N
be D P; I say that as A M is to A N, or as the parabola A K I B to the
parabola A K F, so is D E to D P. For as A M is to F L, that is, as A B
is to A F, so let D E be to D G. Now the proportion of A M to A N is
compounded of the proportions of A M to F L, and of F L to A N. But as A
M to F L, so by construction is D E to D G; and as F L is to A N (seeing
the time in both is the same, namely, A F), so is the length D G to the
length D P; for lengths transmitted in the same time are to one another
as their velocities are. Wherefore by ordinate proportion, as A M is to
A N, that is, as the mean impetus A L multiplied into its time A B, is
to the mean impetus A O multiplied into A F, so is D E to D P; which was
to be proved.

Coroll. I. Lengths transmitted with motion so accelerated, that the
impetus increase continually in duplicate proportion to that of their
times, if the base represent the impetus, are in triplicate proportion
of their impetus acquired in the last point of their times. For as the
length D E is to the length D P, so is the parallelogram A M to the
parallelogram A N, and so the parabola A K I B to the parabola A K F.
But the proportion of the parabola A K I B to the parabola A K F is
triplicate to the proportion which the base B I has to the base F K.
Wherefore also the proportion of D E to D P is triplicate to that of B I
to F K.

Coroll. II. Lengths transmitted in equal times succeeding one another
from the beginning, by motion so accelerated, that the proportion of the
impetus be duplicate to the proportion of the times, are to one another
as the differences of cubic numbers beginning at unity, that is as 7,
19, 37, &c. For if in the first time the length transmitted be as 1, the
length at the end of the second time will be as 8, at the end of the
third time as 27, and at the end of the fourth time as 64, &c.; which
are cubic numbers, whose differences are 7, 19, 37, &c.

Coroll. III. In motion so accelerated, as that the length transmitted be
always to the length transmitted in duplicate proportion to their times,
the length uniformly transmitted in the whole time, and with impetus all
the way equal to that which is last acquired, is as a parabola to a
parallelogram of the same altitude and base, that is, as 2 to 3. For the
parabola A K I B is the impetus increasing in the time A B; and the
parallelogram A I is the greatest uniform impetus multiplied into the
same time A B. Wherefore the lengths transmitted will be as a parabola
to a parallelogram, &c., that is, as 2 to 3.

5. If I should proceed to the explication of such motions as are made by
impetus increasing in proportion triplicate, quadruplicate,
quintuplicate, &c., to that of their times, it would be a labour
infinite and unnecessary. For by the same method by which I have
computed such lengths, as are transmitted with impetus increasing in
single and duplicate proportion, any man may compute such as are
transmitted with impetus increasing in triplicate, quadruplicate, or
what other proportion he pleases.

In making which computation he shall find, that where the impetus
increase in proportion triplicate to that of the times, there the whole
velocity will be designed by the first parabolaster (of which see the
next chapter); and the lengths transmitted will be in proportion
quadruplicate to that of the times. And in like manner, where the
impetus increase in quadruplicate proportion to that of the times, that
there the whole velocity will be designed by the second parabolaster,
and the lengths transmitted will be in quintuplicate proportion to that
of the times; and so on continually.

[Sidenote: If two bodies be moved with uniform motion through two
           lengths, the proportion of those lengths to one another, will
           be compounded of the proportions of time to time, and impetus
           to impetus, directly taken.]

6. If two bodies with uniform motion transmit two lengths, each with its
own impetus and time, the proportion of the lengths transmitted will be
compounded of the proportions of time to time, and impetus to impetus,
directly taken.

Let two bodies be moved uniformly (as in fig. 3), one in the time A B
with the impetus A C, the other in the time A D with the impetus A E. I
say the lengths transmitted have their proportion to one another
compounded of the proportions of A B to A D, and of A C to A E. For let
any length whatsoever, as Z, be transmitted by one of the bodies in the
time A B with the impetus A C; and any other length, as X, be
transmitted by the other body in the time A D with the impetus A E; and
let the parallelograms A F and A G be completed. Seeing now Z is to X
(by art. 2) as the impetus A C multiplied into the time A B is to the
impetus A E multiplied into the time A D, that is, as A F to A G; the
proportion of Z to X will be compounded of the same proportions, of
which the proportion of A F to A G is compounded; but the proportion of
A F to A G is compounded of the proportions of the side A B to the side
A D, and of the side A C to the side A E (as is evident by the Elements
of Euclid), that is, of the proportions of the time A B to the time A D,
and of the impetus A C to the impetus A E. Wherefore also the proportion
of Z to X is compounded of the same proportions of the time A B to the
time A D, and of the impetus A C to the impetus A E; which was to be
demonstrated.

Coroll. I. When two bodies are moved with uniform motion, if the times
and impetus be in reciprocal proportion, the lengths transmitted shall
be equal. For if it were as A B to A D (in the same fig. 3) so
reciprocally A E to A C, the proportion of A F to A G would be
compounded of the proportions of A B to A D, and of A C to A E, that is,
of the proportions of A B to A D, and of A D to A B. Wherefore, A F
would be to A G as A B to A B, that is, equal; and so the two products
made by the multiplication of impetus into time would be equal; and by
consequent, Z would be equal to X.

Coroll. II. If two bodies be moved in the same time, but with different
impetus, the lengths transmitted will be as impetus to impetus. For if
the time of both of them be A D, and their different impetus be A E and
A C, the proportion of A G to D C will be compounded of the proportions
of A E to A C and of A D to A D, that is, of the proportions of A E to A
C and of A C to A C; and so the proportion of A G to D C, that is, the
proportion of length to length, will be as A E to A C, that is, as that
of impetus to impetus. In like manner, if two bodies be moved uniformly,
and both of them with the same impetus, but in different times, the
proportion of the lengths transmitted by them will be as that of their
times. For if they have both the same impetus A C, and their different
times be A B and A D, the proportion of A F to D C will be compounded of
the proportions of A B to A D and of A C to A C; that is, of the
proportions of A B to A D and of A D to A D; and therefore the
proportion of A F to D C, that is, of length to length, will be the same
with that of A B to A D, which is the proportion of time to time.

[Sidenote: If two bodies pass through two lengths with uniform motion,
           the proportion of their times to one another, will be
           compounded of the proportions of length to length, and
           impetus to impetus reciprocally taken; also the proportion of
           their impetus to one another, will be compounded of the
           proportions of length to length, and time to time
           reciprocally taken.]

7. If two bodies pass through two lengths with uniform motion, the
proportion of the times in which they are moved will be compounded of
the proportions of length to length and impetus to impetus reciprocally
taken.

For let any two lengths be given, as (in the same fig. 3) Z and X, and
let one of them be transmitted with the impetus A C, the other with the
impetus A E. I say the proportion of the times in which they are
transmitted, will be compounded of the proportions of Z to X, and of A
E, which is the impetus with which X is transmitted, to A C, the impetus
with which Z is transmitted. For seeing A F is the product of the
impetus A C multiplied into the time A B, the time of motion through Z
will be a line, which is made by the application of the parallelogram A
F to the strait line A C, which line is A B; and therefore A B is the
time of motion through Z. In like manner, seeing A G is the product of
the impetus A E multiplied into the time A D, the time of motion through
X will be a line which is made by the application of A G to the strait
line A D; but A D is the time of motion through X. Now the proportion of
A B to A D is compounded of the proportions of the parallelogram A F to
the parallelogram A G, and of the impetus A E to the impetus A C; which
may be demonstrated thus. Put the parallelograms in order A F, A G, D C,
and it will be manifest that the proportion of A F to D C is compounded
of the proportions of A F to A G and of A G to D C; but A F is to D C as
A B to A D; wherefore also the proportion of A B to A D is compounded of
the proportions of A F to A G and of A G to D C. And because the length
Z is to the length X as A F is to A G, and the impetus A E to the
impetus A C as A G to D C, therefore the proportion of A B to A D will
be compounded of the proportions of the length Z to the length X, and of
the impetus A E to the impetus A C; which was to be demonstrated.

In the same manner it may be proved, that in two uniform motions the
proportion of the impetus is compounded of the proportions of length to
length and of time to time reciprocally taken.

For if we suppose A C (in the same fig. 3) to be the time, and A B the
impetus with which the length Z is passed through; and A E to be the
time, and A D the impetus with which the length X is passed through, the
demonstration will proceed as in the last article.

[Sidenote: If a body be carried on with uniform motion by two movents
           together, which meet in an angle, the line by which it passes
           will be a strait line, subtending the complement of that
           angle to 2 right angles.]

8. If a body be carried by two movents together, which move with strait
and uniform motion, and concur in any given angle, the line by which
that body passes will be a strait line.

Let the movent A B (in fig. 4) have strait and uniform motion, and be
moved till it come into the place C D; and let another movent A C,
having likewise strait and uniform motion, and making with the movent A
B any given angle C A B, be understood to be moved in the same time to D
B; and let the body be placed in the point of their concourse, A. I say
the line which that body describes with its motion is a strait line. For
let the parallelogram A B D C be completed, and its diagonal A D be
drawn; and in the strait line A B let any point E be taken; and from it
let E F be drawn parallel to the strait lines A C and B D, cutting A D
in G; and through the point G let H I be drawn parallel to the strait
lines A B and C D; and lastly, let the measure of the time be A C.
Seeing therefore both the motions are made in the same time, when A B is
in C D, the body also will be in C D; and in like manner, when A C is in
B D, the body will be in B D. But A B is in C D at the same time when A
C is in B D; and therefore the body will be in C D and B D at the same
time; wherefore it will be in the common point D. Again, seeing the
motion from A C to B D is uniform, that is, the spaces transmitted by it
are in proportion to one another as the times in which they are
transmitted, when A C is in E F, the proportion of A B to A E will be
the same with that of E F to E G, that is, of the time A C to the time A
H. Wherefore A B will be in H I in the same time in which A C is in E F,
so that the body will at the same time be in E F and H I, and therefore
in their common point G. And in the same manner it will be, wheresoever
the point E be taken between A and B. Wherefore the body will always be
in the diagonal A D; which was to be demonstrated.

Coroll. From hence it is manifest, that the body will be carried through
the same strait line A D, though the motion be not uniform, provided it
have like acceleration; for the proportion of A B to A E will always be
the same with that of A C to A H.

[Sidenote: If a body be carried by two movents together, one of them
           being moved with uniform, the other with accelerated motion,
           and the proportion of their lengths to their times being
           explicable in numbers, how to find out what line that body
           describes.]

9. If a body be carried by two movents together, which meet in any given
angle, and are moved, the one uniformly, the other with motion uniformly
accelerated from rest, that is, that the proportion of their impetus be
as that of their times, that is, that the proportion of their lengths be
duplicate to that of the lines of their times, till the line of greatest
impetus acquired by acceleration be equal to that of the line of time of
the uniform motion; the line in which the body is carried will be the
crooked line of a semiparabola, whose base is the impetus last acquired,
and vertex the point of rest.

Let the straight line A B (in fig. 5) be understood to be moved with
uniform motion to C D; and let another movent in the strait line A C be
supposed to be moved in the same time to B D, but with motion uniformly
accelerated, that is, with such motion, that the proportion of the
spaces which are transmitted be always duplicate to that of the times,
till the impetus acquired be B D equal to the strait line A C; and let
the semiparabola A G D B be described. I say that by the concourse of
those two movents, the body will be carried through the semiparabolical
crooked line A G D. For let the parallelogram A B D C be completed; and
from the point E, taken anywhere in the strait line A B, let E F be
drawn parallel to A C and cutting the crooked line in G; and lastly,
through the point G let H I be drawn parallel to the strait lines A B
and C D. Seeing therefore the proportion of A B to A E is by supposition
duplicate to the proportion of E F to E G, that is, of the time A C to
the time A H, at the same time when A C is in E F, A B will be in H I;
and therefore the moved body will be in the common point G. And so it
will always be, in what part soever of A B the point E be taken.
Wherefore the moved body will always be found in the parabolical line A
G D; which was to be demonstrated.

10. If a body be carried by two movents together, which meet in any
given angle, and are moved the one uniformly, the other with impetus
increasing from rest, till it be equal to that of the uniform motion,
and with such acceleration, that the proportion of the lengths
transmitted be every where triplicate to that of the times in which they
are transmitted; the line, in which that body is moved, will be the
crooked line of the first semiparabolaster of two means, whose base is
the impetus last acquired.

Let the strait line A B (in the 6th figure) be moved uniformly to C D;
and let another movent A C be moved at the same time to B D with motion
so accelerated, that the proportion of the lengths transmitted be
everywhere triplicate to the proportion of their times; and let the
impetus acquired in the end of that motion be B D, equal to the strait
line A C; and lastly, let A G D be the crooked line of the first
semiparabolaster of two means. I say, that by the concourse of the two
movents together, the body will be always in that crooked line A G D.
For let the parallelogram A B D C be completed; and from the point E,
taken anywhere in the strait line A B, let E F be drawn parallel to A C,
and cutting the crooked line in G; and through the point G let H I be
drawn parallel to the strait lines A B and C D. Seeing therefore the
proportion of A B to A E is, by supposition, triplicate to the
proportion of E F to E G, that is, of the time A C to the time A H, at
the same time when A C is in E F, A B will be in H I; and therefore the
moved body will be in the common point G. And so it will always be, in
what part soever of A B the point E be taken; and by consequent, the
body will always be in the crooked line A G D; which was to be
demonstrated.

11. By the same method it may be shown, what line it is that is made by
the motion of a body carried by the concourse of any two movents, which
are moved one of them uniformly, the other with acceleration, but in
such proportions of spaces and times as are explicable by numbers, as
_duplicate_, _triplicate_, &c., or such as may be designed by any broken
number whatsoever. For which this is the rule. Let the two numbers of
the length and time be added together; and let their sum be the
denominator of a fraction, whose numerator must be the number of the
length. Seek this fraction in the table of the third article of the
XVIIth chapter; and the line sought will be that, which denominates the
three-sided figure noted on the left hand; and the kind of it will be
that, which is numbered above over the fraction. For example, let there
be a concourse of two movents, whereof one is moved uniformly, the other
with motion so accelerated, that the spaces are to the times as 5 to 3.
Let a fraction be made whose denominator is the sum of 5 and 3, and the
numerator 5, namely the fraction 5⁄8. Seek in the table, and you will
find 5⁄8 to be the third in that row, which belongs to the three-sided
figure of four means. Wherefore the line of motion made by the concourse
of two such movents, as are last of all described, will be the crooked
line of the third parabolaster of four means.

12. If motion be made by the concourse of two movents, whereof one is
moved uniformly, the other beginning from rest in the angle of concourse
with any acceleration whatsoever; the movent, which is moved uniformly,
shall put forward the moved body in the several parallel spaces, less
than if both the movents had uniform motion; and still less and less, as
the motion of the other movent is more and more accelerated.

Let the body be placed in A, (in the 7th figure) and be moved by two
movents, by one with uniform motion from the strait line A B to the
strait line C D parallel to it; and by the other with any acceleration,
from the strait line A C to the strait line B D parallel to it; and in
the parallelogram A B D C let a space be taken between any two parallels
E F and G H. I say, that whilst the movent A C passes through the
latitude which is between E F and G H, the body is less moved forwards
from A B towards C D, than it would have been, if the motion from A C to
B D had been uniform.

For suppose that whilst the body is made to descend to the parallel E F
by the power of the movent from A C towards B D, the same body in the
same time is moved forwards to any point F in the line E F, by the power
of the movent from A B towards C D; and let the strait line A F be drawn
and produced indeterminately, cutting G H in H. Seeing therefore, it is
as A E to A G, so E F to G H; if A C should descend towards B D with
uniform motion, the body in the time G H, (for I make A C and its
parallels the measure of time,) would be found in the point H. But
because A C is supposed to be moved towards B D with motion continually
accelerated, that is, in greater proportion of space to space, than of
time to time, in the time G H the body will be in some parallel beyond
it, as between G H and B D. Suppose now that in the end of the time G H
it be in the parallel I K, and in I K let I L be taken equal to G H.
When therefore the body is in the parallel I K, it will be in the point
L. Wherefore when it was in the parallel G H, it was in some point
between G and H, as in the point M; but if both the motions had been
uniform, it had been in the point H; and therefore whilst the movent A C
passes over the latitude which is between E F and G H, the body is less
moved forwards from A B towards C D, than it would have been, if both
the motions had been uniform; which was to be demonstrated.

13. Any length being given, which is passed through in a given time with
uniform motion, to find out what length shall be passed through in the
same time with motion uniformly accelerated, that is, with such motion
that the proportion of the lengths passed through be continually
duplicate to that of their times, and that the line of the impetus last
acquired be equal to the line of the whole time of the motion.

Let A B (in the 8th figure) be a length, transmitted with uniform motion
in the time A C; and let it be required to find another length, which
shall be transmitted in the same time with motion uniformly accelerated,
so that the line of the impetus last acquired be equal to the strait
line A C.

Let the parallelogram A B D C be completed; and let B D be divided in
the middle at E; and between B E and B D let B F be a mean proportional;
and let A F be drawn and produced till it meet with C D produced in G;
and lastly, let the parallelogram A C G H be completed. I say, A H is
the length required.

For as duplicate proportion is to single proportion, so let A H be to A
I, that is, let A I be the half of A H; and let I K be drawn parallel to
the strait line A C, and cutting the diagonal A D in K, and the strait
line A G in L. Seeing therefore A I is the half of A H, I L will also be
the half of B D, that is, equal to B E; and I K equal to B F; for B D,
that is, G H, B F, and B E, that is, I L, being continual proportionals,
A H, A B and A I will also be continual proportionals. But as A B is to
A I, that is, as A H is to A B, so is B D to I K, and so also is G H,
that is, B D to B F; and therefore B F and I K are equal. Now the
proportion of A H to A I is duplicate to the proportion of A B to A I,
that is, to that of B D to I K, or of G H to I K. Wherefore the point K
will be in a parabola, whose diameter is A H, and base G H, which G H is
equal to A C. The body therefore proceeding from rest in A, with motion
uniformly accelerated in the time A C, when it has passed through the
length A H, will acquire the impetus G H equal to the time A C, that is,
such impetus, as that with it the body will pass through the length A C
in the time A C. Wherefore any length being given, &c., which was
propounded to be done.

14. Any length being given, which in a given time is transmitted with
uniform motion, to find out what length shall be transmitted in the same
time with motion so accelerated, that the lengths transmitted be
continually in triplicate proportion to that of their times, and the
line of the impetus last of all acquired be equal to the line of time
given.

Let the given length A B (in the 9th figure) be transmitted with uniform
motion in the time A C; and let it be required to find what length shall
be transmitted in the same time with motion so accelerated, that the
lengths transmitted be continually in triplicate proportion to that of
their times, and the impetus last acquired be equal to the time given.

Let the parallelogram A B D C be completed; and let B D be so divided in
E, that B E be a third part of the whole B D; and let B F be a mean
proportional between B D and B E; and let A F be drawn and produced till
it meet the strait line C D in G; and lastly, let the parallelogram A C
G H be completed. I say, A H is the length required.

For as triplicate proportion is to single proportion, so let A H be to
another line, A I, that is, make A I a third part of the whole A H; and
let I K be drawn parallel to the strait line A C, cutting the diagonal A
D in K, and the strait line A G in L; then, as A B is to A I, so let A I
be to another, A N; and from the point N let N Q be drawn parallel to A
C, cutting A G, A D, and F K produced in P, M, and O; and last of all,
let F O and L M be drawn, which will be equal and parallel to the strait
lines B N and I N. By this construction, the lengths transmitted A H, A
B, A I, and A N, will be continual proportionals; and, in like manner,
the times G H, B F, I L and N P, that is, N Q, N O, N M and N P, will be
continual proportionals, and in the same proportion with A H, A B, A I
and A N. Wherefore the proportion of A H, A B, A I and A N. Wherefore
the proportion of A H to A N is the same with that of B D, that is, of N
Q to N P; and the proportion of N Q to N P triplicate to that of N Q to
N O, that is, triplicate to that of B D to I K; wherefore also the
length A H is to the length A N in triplicate proportion to that of the
time B D, to the time I K; and therefore the crooked line of the first
three-sided figure of two means whose diameter is A H, and base G H
equal to A C, shall pass through the point O; and consequently, A H
shall be transmitted in the time A C, and shall have its last acquired
impetus G H equal to A C, and the proportions of the lengths acquired in
any of the times triplicate to the proportions of the times themselves.
Wherefore A H is the length required to be found out.

By the same method, if a length be given which is transmitted with
uniform motion in any given time, another length may be found out which
shall be transmitted in the same time with motion so accelerated, that
the lengths transmitted shall be to the times in which they are
transmitted, in proportion quadruplicate, quintuplicate, and so on
infinitely. For if B D be divided in E, so that B D be to B E as 4 to 1;
and there be taken between B D and B E a mean proportional F B; and as A
H is to A B, so A B be made to a third, and again so that third to a
fourth, and that fourth to a fifth, A N, so that the proportion of A H
to A N be quadruplicate to that of A H to A B, and the parallelogram N B
F O be completed, the crooked line of the first three-sided figure of
three means will pass through the point O; and consequently, the body
moved will acquire the impetus G H equal to A C in the time A C. And so
of the rest.

15. Also, if the proportion of the lengths transmitted be to that of
their times, as any number to any number, the same method serves for the
finding out of the length transmitted with such impetus, and in such
time.

For let A C (in the 10th figure) be the time in which a body is
transmitted with uniform motion from A to B; and the parallelogram A B D
C being completed, let it be required to find out a length in which that
body may be moved in the same time A C from A, with motion so
accelerated, that the proportion of the lengths transmitted to that of
the times be continually as 3 to 2.

Let B D be so divided in E, that B D be to B E as 3 to 2; and between B
D and B E let B F be a mean proportional; and let A F be drawn and
produced till it meet with C D produced in G; and making A M a mean
proportional between A H and A B, let it be as A M to A B, so A B to A
I; and so the proportion of A H to A I will be to that of A H to A B as
3 to 2; for of the proportions, of which that of A H to A M is one, that
of A H to A B is two, and that of A H to A I is three; and consequently,
as 3 to 2 to that of G H to B F, and (F K being drawn parallel to B I
and cutting A D in K) so likewise to that of G H or B D to I K.
Wherefore the proportion of the length A H to A I is to the proportion
of the time B D to I K as 3 to 2; and therefore if in the time A C the
body be moved with accelerated motion, as was propounded, till it
acquire the impetus H G equal to A C, the length transmitted in the same
time will be A H.

16. But if the proportion of the lengths to that of the times had been
as 4 to 3, there should then have been taken two mean proportionals
between A H and A B, and their proportion should have been continued one
term further, so that A H to A B might have three of the same
proportions, of which A H to A I has four; and all things else should
have been done as is already shown. Now the way how to interpose any
number of means between two lines given, is not yet found out.
Nevertheless this may stand for a general rule; _if there be a time
given, and a length be transmitted in that time with uniform motion; as
for example, if the time be_ A C, _and the length_ A B, _the strait
line_ A G, _which determines the length_ C G _or_ A H, _transmitted in
the same time_ A C _with any accelerated motion, shall so cut_ B D _in_
F, _that_ B F _shall be a mean proportional between_ B D _and_ B E, B E
_being so taken in_ B D, _that the proportion of length to length be
everywhere to the proportion of time to time, as the whole_ B D _is to
its part_ B E.

17. If in a given time two lengths be transmitted, one with uniform
motion, the other with motion accelerated in any proportion of the
lengths to the times; and again, in part of the same time, parts of the
same lengths be transmitted with the same motions, the whole length will
exceed the other length in the same proportion in which one part exceeds
the other part.

For example, let A B (in the 8th figure) be a length transmitted in the
time A C, with uniform motion; and let A H be another length transmitted
in the same time with motion uniformly accelerated, so that the impetus
last acquired be G H equal to A C; and in A H let any part A I be taken,
and transmitted in part of the time A C with uniform motion; and let
another part A B be taken and transmitted in the same part of the time A
C with motion uniformly accelerated; I say, that as A H is to A B, so
will A B be to A I.

Let B D be drawn parallel and equal to H G, and divided in the midst at
E, and between B D and B E let a mean proportional be taken as B F; and
the strait line A G, by the demonstration of art. 13, shall pass through
F. And dividing A H in the midst at I, A B shall be a mean proportional
between A H and A I. Again, because A I and A B are described by the
same motions, if I K be drawn parallel and equal to B F or A M, and
divided in the midst at N, and between I K and I N be taken the mean
proportional I L, the strait line A F will, by the demonstration of the
same art. 13, pass through L. And dividing A B in the midst at O, the
line A I will be a mean proportional between A B and A O. Where A B is
divided in I and O, in like manner as A H is divided in B and I; and as
A H to A B, so is A B to A I. Which was to be proved.

Coroll. Also as A H to A B, so is H B to B I; and so also B I to I O.

And as this, where one of the motions is uniformly accelerated, is
proved out of the demonstration of art. 13; so, when the accelerations
are in double proportion to the times, the same may be proved by the
demonstration of art. 14; and by the same method in all other
accelerations, whose proportions to the times are explicable in numbers.

18. If two sides, which contain an angle in any parallelogram, be moved
in the same time to the sides opposite to them, one of them with uniform
motion, the other with motion uniformly accelerated; that side, which is
moved uniformly, will affect as much with its concourse through the
whole length transmitted, as it would do if the other motion were also
uniform, and the length transmitted by it in the same time were a mean
proportional between the whole and the half.

Let the side A B of the parallelogram A B D C, (in the 11th figure) be
understood to be moved with uniform motion till it be coincident with C
D; and let the time of that motion be A C or B D. Also in the same time
let the side A C be understood to be moved with motion uniformly
accelerated, till it be coincident with B D; then dividing A B in the
middle in E, let A F be made a mean proportional between A B and A E;
and drawing F G parallel to A C, let the side A C be understood to be
moved in the same time A C with uniform motion till it be coincident
with F G. I say, the whole A B confers as much to the velocity of the
body placed in A, when the motion of A C is uniformly accelerated till
it comes to B D, as the part A F confers to the same, when the side A C
is moved uniformly and in the same time to F G.

For seeing A F is a mean proportional between the whole A B and its half
A E, B D will (by the 13th article) be the last impetus acquired by A C,
with motion uniformly accelerated till it come to the same B D; and
consequently, the strait line F B will be the excess, by which the
length, transmitted by A C with motion uniformly accelerated, will
exceed the length transmitted by the same A C in the same time with
uniform motion, and with impetus every where equal to B D. Wherefore, if
the whole A B be moved uniformly to C D in the same time in which A C is
moved uniformly to F G, the part F B, seeing it concurs not at all with
the motion of the side A C which is supposed to be moved only to F G,
will confer nothing to its motion. Again, supposing the side A C to be
moved to B D with motion uniformly accelerated, the side A B with its
uniform motion to C D will less put forwards the body when it is
accelerated in all the parallels, than when it is not at all
accelerated; and by how much the greater the acceleration is, by so much
the less it will put it forwards, as is shown in the 12th article. When
therefore A C is in F G with accelerated motion, the body will not be in
the side C D at the point G, but at the point D; so that G D will be the
excess, by which the length transmitted with accelerated motion to B D
exceeds the length transmitted with uniform motion to F G; so that the
body by its acceleration avoids the action of the part A F, and comes to
the side C D in the time A C, and makes the length C D, which is equal
to the length A B. Wherefore uniform motion from A B to C D in the time
A C, works no more in the whole length A B upon the body uniformly
accelerated from A C to B D, than if A C were moved in the same time
with uniform motion to F G; the difference consisting only in this, that
when A B works upon the body uniformly moved from A C to F G, that, by
which the accelerated motion exceeds the uniform motion, is altogether
in F B or G D; but when the same A B works upon the body accelerated,
that, by which the accelerated motion exceeds the uniform motion, is
dispersed through the whole length A B or C D, yet, so that if it were
collected and put together, it would be equal to the same F B or G D.
Wherefore, if two sides which contain an angle, &c.; which was to be
demonstrated.

19. If two transmitted lengths have to their times any other proportion
explicable by number, and the side A B be so divided in E, that A B be
to A E in the same proportion which the lengths transmitted have to the
times in which they are transmitted, and between A B and A E there be
taken a mean proportional A F; it may be shown by the same method, that
the side, which is moved with uniform motion, works as much with its
concourse through the whole length A B, as it would do if the other
motion were also uniform, and the length transmitted in the same time A
C were that mean proportional A F.

And thus much concerning motion by concourse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  _Vol. 1. Lat. & Eng._
  C. XVI.
  _Fig. 1-11_
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                -------


                              CHAP. XVII.

                         OF FIGURES DEFICIENT.

1. Definitions of a deficient figure; of a complete figure; of the
    complement of a deficient figure; and of proportions which are
    proportional and commensurable to one another.—2. The proportion of
    a deficient figure to its complement.—3. The proportions of
    deficient figures to the parallelograms in which they are described,
    set forth in a table.—4. The description and production of the same
    figures.—5. The drawing of tangents to them.—6. In what proportion
    the same figures exceed a strait-lined triangle of the same altitude
    and base.—7. A table of solid deficient figures described in a
    cylinder.—8. In what proportion the same figures exceed a cone of
    the same altitude and base.—9. How a plain deficient figure may be
    described in a parallelogram, so that it be to a triangle of the
    same base and altitude, as another deficient figure, plain or solid,
    twice taken, is to the same deficient figure, together with the
    complete figure in which it is described.—10. The transferring of
    certain properties of deficient figures described in a parallelogram
    to the proportions of the spaces transmitted with several degrees of
    velocity.—11. Of deficient figures described in a circle.—12. The
    proposition demonstrated in art. 2 confirmed from the elements of
    philosophy.—13. An unusual way of reasoning concerning the equality
    between the superficies of a portion of a sphere and a circle.—14.
    How from the description of deficient figures in a parallelogram,
    any number of mean proportionals may be found out between two given
    strait lines.


[Sidenote: Definition of a deficient figure.]

1. I call those _deficient figures_ which may be understood to be
generated by the uniform motion of some quantity, which decreases
continually, till at last it have no magnitude at all.

[Sidenote: Definitions of a complete figure; of the complement of a
           deficient figure; and of proportions which are proportional &
           commensurable to one another.]

And I call that a _complete figure_, answering to a deficient figure,
which is generated with the same motion and in the same time, by a
quantity which retains always its whole magnitude.

The _complement_ of a deficient figure is that which being added to the
deficient figure makes it complete.

Four proportions are said to be _proportional_, when the first of them
is to the second as the third is to the fourth. For example, if the
first proportion be duplicate to the second, and again, the third be
duplicate to the fourth, those proportions are said to be
_proportional_.

And _commensurable_ proportions are those, which are to one another as
number to number. As when to a proportion given, one proportion is
duplicate, another triplicate, the duplicate proportion will be to the
triplicate proportion as 2 to 3; but to the given proportion it will be
as 2 to 1; and therefore I call those three proportions _commensurable_.

[Sidenote: The proportion of a deficient figure to its complement.]

2. A deficient figure, which is made by a quantity continually
decreasing to nothing by proportions everywhere proportional and
commensurable, is to its complement, as the proportion of the whole
altitude to an altitude diminished in any time is to the proportion of
the whole quantity, which describes the figure, to the same quantity
diminished in the same time.

Let the quantity A B (in fig. 1), by its motion through the altitude A
C, describe the complete figure A D; and again, let the same quantity,
by decreasing continually to nothing in C, describe the deficient figure
A B E F C, whose complement will be the figure B D C F E. Now let A B be
supposed to be moved till it lie in G K, so that the altitude diminished
be G C, and A B diminished be G E; and let the proportion of the whole
altitude A C to the diminished altitude G C, be, for example, triplicate
to the proportion of the whole quantity A B or G K to the diminished
quantity G E. And in like manner, let H I be taken equal to G E, and let
it be diminished to H F; and let the proportion of G C to H C be
triplicate to that of H I to H F; and let the same be done in as many
parts of the strait line A C as is possible; and a line be drawn through
the points B, E, F and C. I say the deficient figure A B E F C is to its
complement B D C F E as 3 to 1, or as the proportion of A C to G C is to
the proportion of A B, that is, of G K to G E.

For (by art. 2, chapter XV.) the proportion of the complement B E F C D
to the deficient figure A B E F C is all the proportions of D B to B A,
O E to E G, Q F to F H, and of all the lines parallel to D B terminated
in the line B E F C, to all the parallels to A B terminated in the same
points of the line B E F C. And seeing the proportions of D B to O E,
and of D B to Q F &c. are everywhere triplicate of the proportions of A
B to G E, and of A B to H F &c. the proportions of H F to A B, and of G
E to A B &c. (by art. 16, chap. XIII.), are triplicate of the
proportions of Q F to D B, and of O E to D B &c. and therefore the
deficient figure A B E F C, which is the aggregate of all the lines H F,
G E, A B, &c. is triple to the complement B E F C D made of all the
lines Q F, O E, D B, &c.; which was to be proved.

It follows from hence, that the same complement B E F C D is 1⁄4 of the
whole parallelogram. And by the same method may be calculated in all
other deficient figures, generated as above declared, the proportion of
the parallelogram to either of its parts; as that when the parallels
increase from a point in the same proportion, the parallelogram will be
divided into two equal triangles; when one increase is double to the
other, it will be divided into a semiparabola and its complement, or
into 2 and 1.

The same construction standing, the same conclusion may otherwise be
demonstrated thus.

Let the strait line C B be drawn cutting G K in L, and through L let M N
be drawn parallel to the strait line A C; wherefore the parallelograms G
M and L D will be equal. Then let L K be divided into three equal parts,
so that it may be to one of those parts in the same proportion which the
proportion of A C to G C, or of G K to G L, hath to the proportion of G
K to G E. Therefore L K will be to one of those three parts as the
arithmetical proportion between G K and G L is to the arithmetical
proportion between G K and the same G K wanting the third part of L K;
and K E will be somewhat greater than a third of L K. Seeing now the
altitude A G or M L is, by reason of the continual decrease, to be
supposed less than any quantity that can be given; L K, which is
intercepted between the diagonal B C and the side B D, will be also less
than any quantity that can be given; and consequently, if G be put so
near to A in _g_, as that the difference between C _g_ and C A be less
than any quantity that can be assigned, the difference also between C
_l_ (removing L to _l_) and C B, will be less than any quantity that can
be assigned; and the line _g l_ being drawn and produced to the line B D
in _k_, cutting the crooked line in _e_, the proportion of G _k_ to G
_l_ will still be triplicate to the proportion of G _k_ to G _e_, and
the difference between _k_ and _e_, the third part of _k l_, will be
less than any quantity that can be given; and therefore the
parallelogram _e_ D will differ from a third part of the parallelogram A
_e_ by a less difference than any quantity that can be assigned. Again,
let H I be drawn parallel and equal to G E, cutting C B in P, the
crooked line in F, and O E in I, and the proportion of C _g_ to C H will
be triplicate to the proportion of H F to H P, and I F will be greater
than the third part of P I. But again, setting H in _h_ so near to _g_,
as that the difference between C _h_ and C _g_ may be but as a point,
the point P will also in _p_ be so near to _l_, as that the difference
between C _p_ and C _l_ will be but as a point; and drawing _h p_ till
it meet with B D in _i_, cutting the crooked line in _f_ and having
drawn _e o_ parallel to B D, cutting D C in _o_, the parallelogram _f o_
will differ less from the third part of the parallelogram _g f_, than by
any quantity that can be given. And so it will be in all other spaces
generated in the same manner. Wherefore the differences of the
arithmetical and geometrical means, which are but as so many points B,
_e_, _f_, &c. (seeing the whole figure is made up of so many indivisible
spaces) will constitute a certain line, such as is the line B E F C,
which will divide the complete figure A D into two parts, whereof one,
namely, A B E F C, which I call a deficient figure, is triple to the
other, namely, B D C F E, which I call the complement thereof. And
whereas the proportion of the altitudes to one another is in this case
everywhere triplicate to that of the decreasing quantities to one
another; in the same manner, if the proportion of the altitudes had been
everywhere quadruplicate to that of the decreasing quantities, it might
have been demonstrated that the deficient figure had been quadruple to
its complement; and so in any other proportion. Wherefore, a deficient
figure, which is made, &c. which was to be demonstrated.

The same rule holdeth also in the diminution of the bases of cylinders,
as is demonstrated in the second article of chapter XV.

[Sidenote: The proportion of deficient figures to the parallelograms in
           which they are described, set forth in a table.]

3. By this proposition, the magnitudes of all deficient figures, when
the proportions by which their bases decrease continually are
proportional to those by which their altitudes decrease, may be compared
with the magnitudes of their complements; and consequently, with the
magnitudes of their complete figures. And they will be found to be, as I
have set them down in the following tables; in which I compare a
parallelogram with three-sided figures; and first, with a strait-lined
triangle, made by the base of the parallelogram continually decreasing
in such manner, that the altitudes be always in proportion to one
another as the bases are, and so the triangle will be equal to its
complement; or the proportions of the altitudes and bases will be as 1
to 1, and then the triangle will be half the parallelogram. Secondly,
with that three-sided figure which is made by the continual decreasing
of the bases in subduplicate proportion to that of the altitudes; and so
the deficient figure will be double to its complement, and to the
parallelogram as 2 to 3. Then, with that where the proportion of the
altitudes is triplicate to that of the bases; and then the deficient
figure will be triple to its complement, and to the parallelogram as 3
to 4. Also the proportion of the altitudes to that of the bases may be
as 3 to 2; and then the deficient figure will be to its complement as 3
to 2, and to the parallelogram as 3 to 5; and so forwards, according as
more mean proportionals are taken, or as the proportions are more
multiplied, as may be seen in the following table. For example, if the
bases decrease so, that the proportion of the altitudes to that of the
bases be always as 5 to 2, and it be demanded what proportion the figure
made has to the parallelogram, which is supposed to be unity; then,
seeing that where the proportion is taken five times, there must be four
means; look in the table amongst the three-sided figures of four means,
and seeing the proportion was as 5 to 2, look in the uppermost row for
the number 2, and descending in the second column till you meet with
that three-sided figure, you will find 5⁄7; which shows that the
deficient figure is to the parallelogram as 5⁄7 to 1, or as 5 to 7.

                               | 1  |  2    3    4    5    6    7
Parallelogram                  | 1  |    :    :    :    :    :    :
                               +----+
Strait-sided triangle          | 1/2|    :    :    :    :    :    :
                               |----+
Three-sided figure of 1 mean   | 2/3|    :    :    :    :    :    :
                               |----+----+
Three-sided figure of 2 means  | 3/4| 3/5|    :    :    :    :    :
                               |----+----+----+
Three-sided figure of 3 means  | 4/5| 4/6| 4/7|    :    :    :    :
                               |----+----+----+----+
Three-sided figure of 4 means  | 5/6| 5/7| 5/8|5/9 |    :    :    :
                               |----+----+----+----+----+
Three-sided figure of 5 means  | 6/7| 6/8| 6/9|6/10|6/11|    :    :
                               |----+----+----+----+----+----+
Three-sided figure of 6 means  | 7/8| 7/9|7/11|7/11|7/12|7/13|   `` :
                               |----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
Three-sided figure of 7 means  | 8/9|8/10|8/11|8/12|8/13|8/14|8/15|
                               +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+

[Sidenote: Description & production of the same figures.]

4. Now for the better understanding of the nature of these three-sided
figures, I will show how they may be described by points; and first,
those which are in the first column of the table. Any parallelogram
being described, as A B C D (in figure 2) let the diagonal B D be drawn;
and the strait-lined triangle B C D will be half the parallelogram; then
let any number of lines, as E F, be drawn parallel to the side B C, and
cutting the diagonal B D in G; and let it be everywhere, as E F to E G,
so E G to another, E H; and through all the points H let the line B H H
D be drawn; and the figure B H H D C will be that which I call a
three-sided figure of one mean, because in three proportionals, as E F,
E G and E H, there is but one mean, namely, E G; and this three-sided
figure will be 2⁄3 of the parallelogram, and is called a _parabola_.
Again, let it be as E G to E H, so E H to another, E I, and let the line
B I I D be drawn, making the three-sided figure B I I D C; and this will
be 3⁄4 of the parallelogram, and is by many called a _cubic parabola_.
In like manner, if the proportions be further continued in E F, there
will be made the rest of the three-sided figures of the first column;
which I thus demonstrate. Let there be drawn strait lines, as H K and G
L, parallel to the base D C. Seeing therefore the proportion of E F to E
H is duplicate to that of E F to E G, or of B C to B L, that is, of C D
to L G, or of K M (producing K H to A D in M) to K H, the proportion of
B C to B K will be duplicate to that of K M to K H; but as B C is to B
K, so is D C or K M to K N, and therefore the proportion of K M to K N
is duplicate to that of K M to K H; and so it will be wheresoever the
parallel K M be placed. Wherefore the figure B H H D C is double to its
complement B H H D A, and consequently 2⁄3 of the whole parallelogram.
In the same manner, if through I be drawn O P I Q parallel and equal to
C D, it may be demonstrated that the proportion of O Q to O P, that is,
of B C to B O, is triplicate that of O Q to O I, and therefore that the
figure B I I D C is triple to its complement B I I D A, and consequently
¾ of the whole parallelogram, &c.

Secondly, such three-sided figures as are in any of the transverse rows,
may be thus described. Let A B C D (in fig. 3) be a parallelogram, whose
diagonal is B D. I would describe in it such figures, as in the
preceding table I call three-sided figures of three means. Parallel to D
C, I draw E F as often as is necessary, cutting B D in G; and between E
F and E G, I take three proportionals E H, E I and E K. If now there be
drawn lines through all the points H, I and K, that through all the
points H will make the figure B H D C, which is the first of those
three-sided figures; and that through all the points I, will make the
figure B I D C, which is the second; and that which is drawn through all
the points K, will make the figure B K D C the third of those
three-sided figures. The first of these, seeing the proportion of E F to
E G is quadruplicate of that E F to E H, will be to its complement as 4
to 1, and to the parallelogram as 4 to 5. The second, seeing the
proportion of E F to E G is to that of E F to E I as 4 to 2, will be
double to its complement, and 4⁄6 or 2⁄3 of the parallelogram. The
third, seeing the proportion of E F to E G is that of E F to E K as 4 to
3, will be to its complement as 4 to 3, and to the parallelogram as 4 to
7.

Any of these figures being described may be produced at pleasure, thus;
let A B C D (in fig. 4) be a parallelogram, and in it let the figure B K
D C be described, namely, the third three-sided figure of three means.
Let B D be produced indefinitely to E, and let E F be made parallel to
the base D C, cutting A D produced in G, and B C produced in F; and in G
E let the point H be so taken, that the proportion of F E to F G may be
quadruplicate to that of F E to F H, which may be done by making F H the
greatest of three proportionals between F E and F G; the crooked line B
K D produced, will pass through the point H. For if the strait line B H
be drawn, cutting C D in I, and H L be drawn parallel to G D, and
meeting C D produced in L; it will be as F E to F G, so C L to C I, that
is, in quadruplicate proportion to that of F E to F H, or of C D to C I.
Wherefore if the line B K D be produced according to its generation, it
will fall upon the point H.

[Sidenote: The drawing of tangents to them.]

5. A strait line may be drawn so as to touch the crooked line of the
said figure in any point, in this manner. Let it be required to draw a
tangent to the line B K D H (in fig. 4) in the point D. Let the points B
and D be connected, and drawing D A equal and parallel to B C, let B and
A be connected; and because this figure is by construction the third of
three means, let there be taken in A B three points, so, that by them
the same A B be divided into four equal parts; of which take three,
namely, A M, so that A B may be to A M, as the figure B K D C is to its
complement. I say, the strait line M D will touch the figure in the
point given D. For let there be drawn anywhere between A B and D C a
parallel, as R Q, cutting the strait line B D, the crooked line B K D,
the strait line M D, and the strait line A D, in the points P, K, O and
Q. R K will therefore, by construction, be the least of three means in
geometrical proportion between R Q and R P. Wherefore (by coroll. of
art. 28, chapter XIII.) R K will be less than R O; and therefore M D
will fall without the figure. Now if M D be produced to N, F N will be
the greatest of three means in arithmetical proportion between F E and F
G; and F H will be the greatest of three means in geometrical proportion
between the same F E and F G. Wherefore (by the same coroll. of art. 28,
chapter XIII.) F H will be less than F N; and therefore D N will fall
without the figure, and the strait line M N will touch the same figure
only in the point D.

[Sidenote: In what proportion the same figures exceed a strait-lined
           triangle of the same altitude and base.]

6. The proportion of a deficient figure to its complement being known,
it may also be known what proportion a strait-lined triangle has to the
excess of the deficient figure above the same triangle; and these
proportions I have set down in the following table; where if you seek,
for example, how much the fourth three-sided figure of five means
exceeds a triangle of the same altitude and base, you will find in the
concourse of the fourth column with the three-sided figures of five
means 2⁄10; by which is signified, that that three-sided figure exceeds
the triangle by two-tenths or by one-fifth part of the same triangle.

                                      1    2    3    4    5    6    7
       The triangle                 | 1      :    :    :    :    :    :
                                    +---+
      {A three-sided fig. of 1 mean |1/3|    :    :    :    :    :    :
      {                             +---+----+
      {A three-sided fig. of 2 means|2/4| 1/5|    :    :    :    :    :
      {                             +---+----+----+
The   {A three-sided fig. of 3 means|3/5| 2/6| 1/7|    :    :    :    :
      {                             +---+----+----+----+
excess{A three-sided fig. of 4 means|4/6| 3/7| 2/8| 1/9|    :    :    :
      {                             +---+----+----+----+----+
of    {A three-sided fig. of 5 means|5/7| 4/8| 3/9|2/10|1/11|    :    :
      {                             +---+----+----+----+----+----+
      {A three-sided fig. of 6 means|6/8| 5/9|4/10|3/11|2/12|1/13|    :
      {                             +---+----+----+----+----+----+----+
      {A three-sided fig. of 7 means|7/9|6/10|5/11|4/12|3/13|2/14|1/15|
                                    +---+----+----+----+----+----+----+

[Sidenote: A table of solid deficient figures described in a cylinder.]

7. In the next table are set down the proportion of a cone and the
solids of the said three-sided figures, namely, the proportions between
them and a cylinder. As for example, in the concourse of the second
column with the three-sided figures of four means, you have 5⁄9; which
gives you to understand, that the solid of the second three-sided figure
of four means is to the cylinder as 5⁄9 to 1, or as 5 to 9.

                                      | 1    2    3    4    5    6    7
      { A cylinder                    | 1  |    :    :    :    :    :    :
      {                               +----+    :    :    :    :    :    :
      { A cone                        |1/3 |    :    :    :    :    :    :
      {                               +----+----+    :    :    :    :    :
      { A three-sided fig. of 1 mean  |2/4 |    |    :    :    :    :    :
      {                               +----|----+    :    :    :    :    :
The   { A three-sided fig. of 2 means |3/5 |3/7 |    :    :    :    :    :
solids{                               +----+----+----+----+    :    :    :
of    { A three-sided fig. of 3 means |4/6 |4/8 |4/10|    |    :    :    :
      {                               +----+----+----+----+----+    :    :
      { A three-sided fig. of 4 means |5/7 |5/9 |5/11|5/13|    |    :    :
      {                               +----+----+----+----+----+----+    :
      { A three-sided fig. of 5 means |6/8 |6/10|6/12|6/14|6/16|    |    :
      {                               +----+----+----+----+----+----+----|
      { A three-sided fig. of 6 means |7/9 |7/11|7/13|7/15|7/17|7/19|    |
      {                               +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
      { A three-sided fig. of 7 means |8/10|8/12|8/14|8/16|8/18|8/20|8/22|
                                      +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+

[Sidenote: In what proportion the same figures exceed a cone of the same
           altitude and base.]

8. Lastly, the excess of the solids of the said three-sided figures
above a cone of the same altitude and base, are set down in the table
which follows:

                                     1     2     3     4     5     6     7
          The Cone                | 1   :     :     :     :     :     :     :
                                  +-----+
        {Of the solid of a three-}| 6/12|     :     :     :     :     :     :
        {  sided figure of 1 mean}|     |
The ex- {                         +-----+-----+
cesses  {Ditto ditto, 2 means     |12/15| 6/21|     :     :     :     :     :
of the  {                         +-----+-----+-----+
solids  {Ditto ditto, 3 means     |18/18|12/24| 6/30|     :     :     :     :
of these{                         +-----+-----+-----+-----+
three-  {Ditto ditto, 4 means     |24/21|18/27|12/33| 6/39|     :     :     :
sided   {                         +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
figures {Ditto ditto, 5 means     |30/24|24/30|18/36|12/42| 6/48|     :     :
above a {                         +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
cone.   {Ditto ditto, 6 means     |36/27|30/33|24/39|18/45|12/51| 6/57|     :
        {                         +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
        {Ditto ditto, 7 means     |42/30|36/36|30/42|24/48|18/54|12/60| 6/66|
                                  +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+

[Sidenote: How a plain deficient figure may be described in a
           parallelogram, so that it be to a triangle of the same base
           and altitude, as another deficient figure, plain or solid,
           twice taken, is to the same deficient figure, together with
           the complete figure, in which it is described.]

9. If any of these deficient figures, of which I have now spoken, as A B
C D (in the 5th figure) be inscribed within the complete figure B E,
having A D C E for its complement; and there be made upon C B produced
the triangle A B I; and the parallelogram A B I K be completed; and
there be drawn parallel to the strait line C I, any number of lines, as
M F, cutting every one of them the crooked line of the deficient figure
in D, and the strait lines A C, A B and A I in H, G, and L; and as G F
is to G D, so G L be made to another, G N; and through all the points N
there be drawn the line A N I: there will be a deficient figure A N I B,
whose complement will be A N I K. I say, the figure A N I B is to the
triangle A B I, as the deficient figure A B C D twice taken is to the
same deficient figure together with the complete figure B E.

For as the proportion of A B to A G, that is, of G M to G L, is to the
proportion of G M to G N, so is the magnitude of the figure A N I B to
that of its complement A N I K, by the second article of this chapter.

But, by the same article, as the proportion of A B to A G, that is, of G
M to G L, is to the proportion of G F to G D, that is, by construction,
of G L to G N, so is the figure A B C D to its complement A D C E.

And by composition, as the proportion of G M to G L, together with that
of G L to G N, is to the proportion of G M to G L, so is the complete
figure B E to the deficient figure A B C D.

And by conversion, as the proportion of G M to G L is to both the
proportions of G M to G L and of G L to G N, that is, to the proportion
of G M to G N, which is the proportion compounded of both, so is the
deficient figure A B C D to the complete figure B E.

But it was, as the proportion of G M to G L to that of G M to G N, so
the figure A N I B to its complement A N I K. And therefore, A B C D. B
E :: A N I B. A N I K are proportionals. And by composition, A B C D + B
E. A B C D :: B K. A N I B are proportionals.

And by doubling the consequents, A B C D + B E. 2 A B C D :: B K. 2 A N
I B are proportionals.

And by taking the halves of the third and the fourth, A B C D + B E. 2 A
B C D :: A B I. A N I B are also proportionals; which was to be proved.

[Sidenote: The transferring of certain properties of deficient figures
           described in a parallelogram to the proportions of spaces
           transmitted with several degrees of velocity.]

10. From what has been said of deficient figures described in a
parallelogram, may be found out what proportions spaces, transmitted
with accelerated motion in determined times, have to the times
themselves, according as the moved body is accelerated in the several
times with one or more degrees of velocity.

For let the parallelogram A B C D, in the 6th figure, and in it the
three-sided figure D E B C be described; and let F G be drawn anywhere
parallel to the base, cutting the diagonal B D in H, and the crooked
line B E D in E; and let the proportion of B C to B F be, for example,
triplicate to that of F G to F E; whereupon the figure D E B C will be
triple to its complement B E D A; and in like manner, I E being drawn
parallel to B C, the three-sided figure E K B F will be triple to its
complement B K E I. Wherefore the parts of the deficient figure cut off
from the vertex by strait lines parallel to the base, namely, D E B C
and E K B F, will be to one another as the parallelograms A C and I F;
that is, in proportion compounded of the proportions of the altitudes
and bases. Seeing therefore the proportion of the altitude B C to the
altitude B F is triplicate to the proportion of the base D C to the base
F E, the figure D E B C to the figure E K B F will be quadruplicate to
the proportion of the same D C to F E. And by the same method, may be
found out what proportion any of the said three-sided figures has to any
part of the same, cut off from the vertex by a strait line parallel to
the base.

Now as the said figures are understood to be described by the continual
decreasing of the base, as of C D, for example, till it end in a point,
as in B; so also they may be understood to be described by the continual
increasing of a point, as of B, till it acquire any magnitude, as that
of C D.

Suppose now the figure B E D C to be described by the increasing of the
point B to the magnitude C D. Seeing therefore the proportion of B C to
B F is triplicate to that of C D to F E, the proportion of F E to C D
will, by conversion, as I shall presently demonstrate, be triplicate to
that B F to B C. Wherefore if the strait line B C be taken for the
measure of the time in which the point B is moved, the figure E K B F
will represent the sum of all the increasing velocities in the time B F;
and the figure D E B C will in like manner represent the sum of all the
increasing velocities in the time B C. Seeing therefore the proportion
of the figure E K B F to the figure D E B C is compounded of the
proportions of altitude to altitude, and base to base; and seeing the
proportion of F E to C D is triplicate to that of B F to B C; the
proportion of the figure E K B F to the figure D E B C will be
quadruplicate to that of B F to B C; that is, the proportion of the sum
of the velocities in the time B F, to the sum of the velocities in the
time B C, will be quadruplicate to the proportion of B F to B C.
Wherefore if a body be moved from B with velocity so increasing, that
the velocity acquired in the time B F be to the velocity acquired in the
time B C in triplicate proportion to that of the times themselves B F to
B C, and the body be carried to F in the time B F; the same body in the
time B C will be carried through a line equal to the fifth proportional
from B F in the continual proportion of B F to B C. And by the same
manner of working, we may determine what spaces are transmitted by
velocities increasing according to any other proportions.

It remains that I demonstrate the proportion of F E to C D to be
triplicate to that of B F to B C. Seeing therefore the proportion of C
D, that is, of F G to F E is subtriplicate to that of B C to B F; the
proportion of F G to F E will also be subtriplicate to that of F G to F
H. Wherefore the proportion of F G to F H is triplicate to that of F G,
that is, of C D to F E. But in four continual proportionals, of which
the least is the first, the proportion of the first to the fourth, (by
the 16th article of chapter XIII.), is subtriplicate to the proportion
of the third to the same fourth. Wherefore the proportion of F H to G F
is subtriplicate to that of F E to C D; and therefore the proportion of
F E to C D is triplicate to that of F H to F G, that is, of B F to B C;
which was to be proved.

It may from hence be collected, that when the velocity of a body is
increased in the same proportion with that of the times, the degrees of
velocity above one another proceed as numbers do in immediate succession
from unity, namely, as 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. And when the velocity is
increased in proportion duplicate to that of the times, the degrees
proceed as numbers from unity, skipping one, as 1, 3, 5, 7, &c. Lastly,
when the proportions of the velocities are triplicate to those of the
times, the progression of the degrees is as that of numbers from unity,
skipping two in every place, as 1, 4, 7, 10, &c., and so of other
proportions. For geometrical proportionals, when they are taken in every
point, are the same with arithmetical proportionals.

[Sidenote: Of deficient figures described in a circle.]

11. Moreover, it is to be noted that as in quantities, which are made by
any magnitudes decreasing, the proportions of the figures to one another
are as the proportions of the altitudes to those of the bases; so also
it is in those, which are made with motion decreasing, which motion is
nothing else but that power by which the described figures are greater
or less. And therefore in the description of _Archimedes' spiral_, which
is done by the continual diminution of the semidiameter of a circle in
the same proportion in which the circumference is diminished, the space,
which is contained within the semidiameter and the spiral line, is a
third part of the whole circle. For the semidiameters of circles,
inasmuch as circles are understood to be made up of the aggregate of
them, are so many sectors; and therefore in the description of a spiral,
the sector which describes it is diminished in duplicate proportions to
the diminutions of the circumference of the circle in which it is
inscribed; so that the complement of the spiral, that is, that space in
the circle which is without the spiral line, is double to the space
within the spiral line. In the same manner, if there be taken a mean
proportional everywhere between the semidiameter of the circle, which
contains the spiral, and that part of the semidiameter which is within
the same, there will be made another figure, which will be half the
circle. And to conclude, this rule serves for all such spaces as may be
described by a line or superficies decreasing either in magnitude of
power; so that if the proportions, in which they decrease, be
commensurable to the proportions of the times in which they decrease,
the magnitudes of the figures they describe will be known.

[Sidenote: The proposition demonstrated in art. 2 confirmed from the
           elements of philosophy.]

12. The truth of that proposition, which I demonstrated in art. 2, which
is the foundation of all that has been said concerning deficient
figures, may be derived from the elements of philosophy, as having its
original in this; _that all equality and inequality between two effects,
that is, all proportion, proceeds from, and is determined by, the equal
and unequal causes of those effects, or from the proportion which the
causes, concurring to one effect, have to the causes which concur to the
producing of the other effect_; and that therefore the proportions of
quantities are the same with the proportions of their causes. Seeing,
therefore, two deficient figures, of which one is the complement of the
other, are made, one by motion decreasing in a certain time and
proportion, the other by the loss of motion in the same time; the
causes, which make and determine the quantities of both the figures, so
that they can be no other than they are, differ only in this, that the
proportions by which the quantity which generates the figure proceeds in
describing of the same, that is, the proportions of the remainders of
all the times and altitudes, may be other proportions than those by
which the same generating quantity decreases in making the complement of
that figure, that is, the proportions of the quantity which generates
the figure continually diminished. Wherefore, as the proportion of the
times in which motion is lost, is to that of the decreasing quantities
by which the deficient figure is generated, so will the defect or
complement be to the figure itself which is generated.

[Sidenote: An unusual way of reasoning concerning the equality between
           the superficies of a portion of a sphere and a circle.]

13. There are also other quantities which are determinable from the
knowledge of their causes, namely, from the comparison of the motions by
which they are made; and that more easily than from the common elements
of geometry. For example, that the superficies of any portion of a
sphere is equal to that circle, whose radius is a strait line drawn from
the pole of the portion to the circumference of its base, I may
demonstrate in this manner. Let B A C (in fig. 7) be a portion of a
sphere, whose axis is A E, and whose base is B C; and let A B be the
strait line drawn from the pole A to the base in B; and let A D, equal
to A B, touch the great circle B A C in the pole A. It is to be proved
that the circle made by the radius A D is equal to the superficies of
the portion B A C. Let the plain A E B D be understood to make a
revolution about the axis A E; and it is manifest that by the strait
line A D a circle will be described; and by the arch A B the superficies
of a portion of a sphere; and lastly, by the subtense A B the
superficies of a right cone. Now seeing both the strait line A B and the
arch A B make one and the same revolution, and both of them have the
same extreme points A and B, the cause why the spherical superficies,
which is made by the arch, is greater than the conical superficies,
which is made by the subtense, is, that A B the arch is greater than A B
the subtense; and the cause why it is greater consists in this, that
although they be both drawn from A to B, yet the subtense is drawn
strait, but the arch angularly, namely, according to that angle which
the arch makes with the subtense, which angle is equal to the angle D A
B (for an angle of contingence adds nothing to an angle of a segment, as
has been shown in chapter XIV, article 16.) Wherefore the magnitude of
the angle D A B is the cause why the superficies of the portion,
described by the arch A B, is greater than the superficies of the right
cone described by the subtense A B.

Again, the cause why the circle described by the tangent A D is greater
than the superficies of the right cone described by the subtense A B
(notwithstanding that the tangent and the subtense are equal, and both
moved round in the same time) is this, that A D stands at right angles
to the axis, but A B obliquely; which obliquity consists in the same
angle D A B. Seeing therefore the quantity of the angle D A B is that
which makes the excess both of the superficies of the portion, and of
the circle made by the radius A D, above the superficies of the right
cone described by the subtense A B; it follows, that both the
superficies of the portion and that of the circle do equally exceed the
superficies of the cone. Wherefore the circle made by A D or A B, and
the spherical superficies made by the arch A B, are equal to one
another; which was to be proved.

[Sidenote: How from the description of deficient figures in a
           parallelogram, any number of mean proportionals may be found
           out between two given strait lines.]

14. If these deficient figures, which I have described in a
parallelogram, were capable of exact description, then any number of
mean proportionals might be found out between two strait lines given.
For example, in the parallelogram A B C D, (in figure 8) let the
three-sided figure of two means be described (which many call a _cubical
parabola_); and let R and S be two given strait lines; between which, if
it be required to find two mean proportionals, it may be done thus. Let
it be as R to S, so B C to B F; and let F E be drawn parallel to B A,
and cut the crooked line in E; then through E let G H be drawn parallel
and equal to the strait line A D, and cut the diagonal B D in I; for
thus we have G I the greatest of two means between G H and G E, as
appears by the description of the figure in article 4. Wherefore, if it
be as G H to G I, so R to another line, T, that T will be the greatest
of two means between R and S. And therefore if it be again as R to T, so
T to another line, X, that will be done which was required.

In the same manner, four mean proportionals may be found out, by the
description of a three-sided figure of four means; and so any other
number of means, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  _Vol. 1. Lat. & Eng._
  C. XVII.
  _Fig. 1-8_
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XVIII.

                OF THE EQUATION OF STRAIT LINES WITH THE
                  CROOKED LINES OF PARABOLAS AND OTHER
                FIGURES MADE IN IMITATION OF PARABOLAS.

1. To find the strait line equal to the crooked line of a
    semiparabola.—2. To find a strait line equal to the crooked line of
    the first semiparabolaster, or to the crooked line of any other of
    the deficient figures of the table of the 3d article of the
    precedent chapter.


[Sidenote: To find a strait line equal to the crooked line of a
           semiparabola.]

1. A parabola being given, to find a strait line equal to the crooked
line of the semiparabola.

Let the parabolical line given be A B C (in figure 1), and the diameter
found be A D, and the base drawn D C; and the parallelogram A D C E
being completed, draw the strait line A C. Then dividing A D into two
equal parts in F, draw F H equal and parallel to D C, cutting A C in K,
and the parabolical line in O; and between F H and F O take a mean
proportional F P, and draw A O, A P and P C. I say that the two lines A
P and P C, taken together as one line, are equal to the parabolical line
A B O C.

For the line A B O C being a parabolical line, is generated by the
concourse of two motions, one uniform from A to E, the other in the same
time uniformly accelerated from rest in A to D. And because the motion
from A to E is uniform, A E may represent the times of both those
motions from the beginning to the end. Let therefore A E be the time;
and consequently the lines ordinately applied in the semiparabola will
design the parts of time wherein the body, that describeth the line A B
O C, is in every point of the same; so that as at the end of the time A
E or D C it is in C, so at the end of the time F O it will be in O. And
because the velocity in A D is increased uniformly, that is, in the same
proportion with the time, the same lines ordinately applied in the
semiparabola will design also the continual augmentation of the impetus,
till it be at the greatest, designed by the base D C. Therefore
supposing uniform motion in the line A F, in the time F K the body in A
by the concourse of the two uniform motions in A F and F K will be moved
uniformly in the line A K; and K O will be the increase of the impetus
or swiftness gained in the time F K; and the line A O will be uniformly
described by the concourse of the two uniform motions in A F and F O in
the time F O. From O draw O L parallel to E C, cutting A C in L; and
draw L N parallel to D C, cutting E C in N, and the parabolical line in
M; and produce it on the other side to A D in I; and I N, I M and I L
will be, by the construction of a parabola, in continual proportion, and
equal to the three lines F H, F P and F O; and a strait line parallel to
E C passing through M will fall on P; and therefore O P will be the
increase of impetus gained in the time F O or I L. Lastly, produce P M
to C D in Q; and Q C or M N or P H will be the increase of impetus
proportional to the time F P or I M or D Q. Suppose now uniform motion
from H to C in the time P H. Seeing therefore in the time F P with
uniform motion and the impetus increased in proportion to the times, is
described the straight line A P; and in the rest of the time and
impetus, namely, P H, is described the line C P uniformly; it followeth
that the whole line A P C is described with the whole impetus, and in
the same time wherewith is described the parabolical line A B C; and
therefore the line A P C, made of the two strait lines A P and P C, is
equal to the parabolical line A B C; which was to be proved.

[Sidenote: To find a strait line equal to the crooked line of the first
           semiparabolaster or to the crooked line of any other of the
           deficient figures of the table of art. 3 of the preceding
           chapter.]

2. To find a strait line equal to the crooked line of the first
semiparabolaster.

[Sidenote: [Discussion of Figure 18.2]]

Let A B C be the crooked line of the first semiparabolaster; A D the
diameter; D C the base; and let the parallelogram completed be A D C E,
whose diagonal is A C. Divide the diameter into two equal parts in F,
and draw F H equal and parallel to D C, cutting A C in K, the crooked
line in O, and E C in H. Then draw O L parallel to E C, cutting A C in
L; and draw L N parallel to the base D C, cutting the crooked line in M,
and the strait line E C in N; and produce it on the other side to A D in
I. Lastly, through the point M draw P M Q parallel and equal to H C,
cutting F H in P; and join C P, A P and A O. I say, the two strait lines
A P and P C are equal to the crooked line A B O C.

For the line A B O C, being the crooked line of the first
semiparabolaster, is generated by the concourse of two motions, one
uniform from A to E, the other in the same time accelerated from rest in
A to D, so as that the impetus increaseth in proportion perpetually
triplicate to that of the increase of the time, or which is all one, the
lengths transmitted are in proportion triplicate to that of the times of
their transmission; for as the impetus or quicknesses increase, so the
lengths transmitted increase also. And because the motion from A to E is
uniform, the line A E may serve to represent the time, and consequently
the lines, ordinately drawn in the semiparabolaster, will design the
parts of time wherein the body, beginning from rest in A, describeth by
its motion the crooked line A B O C. And because D C, which represents
the greatest acquired impetus, is equal to A E, the same ordinate lines
will represent the several augmentations of the impetus increasing from
rest in A. Therefore, supposing uniform motion from A to F, in the time
F K there will be described, by the concourse of the two uniform motions
A F and F K, the line A K uniformly, and K O will be the increase of
impetus in the time F K; and by the concourse of the two uniform motions
in A F and F O will be described the line A O uniformly. Through the
point L draw the strait line L M N parallel to D C, cutting the strait
line A D in I, the crooked line A B C in M, and the strait line E C in
N; and through the point M the strait line P M Q parallel and equal to H
C, cutting D C in Q and F H in P. By the concourse therefore of the two
uniform motions in A F and F P in the time F P will be uniformly
described the strait line A P; and L M or O P will be the increase of
impetus to be added for the time F O. And because the proportion of I N
to I L is triplicate to the proportion of I N to I M, the proportion of
F H to F O will also be triplicate to the proportion of F H to F P; and
the proportional impetus gained in the time F P is P H. So that F H
being equal to D C, which designed the whole impetus acquired by the
acceleration, there is no more increase of impetus to be computed. Now
in the time P H suppose an uniform motion from H to C; and by the two
uniform motions in C H and H P will be described uniformly the strait
line P C. Seeing therefore the two strait lines A P and P C are
described in the time A E with the same increase of impetus, wherewith
the crooked line A B O C is described in the same time A E, that is,
seeing the line A P C and the line A B O C are transmitted by the same
body in the same time and with equal velocities, the lines themselves
are equal; which was to be demonstrated.

By the same method (if any of the semiparabolasters in the table of art.
3 of the precedent chapter be exhibited) may be found a strait line
equal to the crooked line thereof, namely, by dividing the diameter into
two equal parts, and proceeding as before. Yet no man hitherto hath
compared any crooked with any strait line, though many geometricians of
every age have endeavoured it. But the cause, why they have not done it,
may be this, that there being in Euclid no definition of equality, nor
any mark by which to judge of it besides congruity (which is the 8th
axiom of the first Book of his Elements) a thing of no use at all in the
comparing of strait and crooked; and others after Euclid (except
Archimedes and Apollonius, and in our time Bonaventura) thinking the
industry of the ancients had reached to all that was to be done in
geometry, thought also, that all that could be propounded was either to
be deduced from what they had written, or else that it was not at all to
be done: it was therefore disputed by some of those ancients themselves,
whether there might be any equality at all between crooked and strait
lines; which question Archimedes, who assumed that some strait line was
equal to the circumference of a circle, seems to have despised, as he
had reason. And there is a late writer that granteth that between a
strait and a crooked line there is equality; but now, says he, since the
fall of Adam, without the special assistance of Divine Grace it is not
to be found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  _Vol. 1. Lat. & Eng._
  C. XVIII.
  _Fig. 1-2_
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XIX.

                 OF ANGLES OF INCIDENCE AND REFLECTION,
                         EQUAL BY SUPPOSITION.

1. If two strait lines falling upon another strait line be parallel, the
    lines reflected from them shall also be parallel.—2. If two strait
    lines drawn from one point fall upon another strait line, the lines
    reflected from them, if they be drawn out the other way, will meet
    in an angle equal to the angle made by the lines of incidence.—3. If
    two strait parallel lines, drawn not oppositely, but from the same
    parts, fall upon the circumference of a circle, the lines reflected
    from them, if produced they meet within the circle, will make an
    angle double to that which is made by two strait lines drawn from
    the centre to the points of incidence.—4. If two strait lines drawn
    from the same point without a circle fall upon the circumference,
    and the lines reflected from them being produced meet within the
    circle, they will make an angle equal to twice that angle, which is
    made by two strait lines drawn from the centre to the points of
    incidence, together with the angle which the incident lines
    themselves make.—5. If two strait lines drawn from one point fall
    upon the concave circumference of a circle, and the angle they make
    be less than twice the angle at the centre, the lines reflected from
    them and meeting within the circle will make an angle, which being
    added to the angle of the incident lines will be equal to twice the
    angle at the centre.—6. If through any one point two unequal chords
    be drawn cutting one another, and the centre of the circle be not
    placed between them, and the lines reflected from them concur
    wheresoever, there cannot through the point, through which the two
    former lines were drawn, be drawn any other strait line whose
    reflected line shall pass through the common point of the two former
    lines reflected.—7. In equal chords the same is not true.—8. Two
    points being given in the circumference of a circle, to draw two
    strait lines to them, so that their reflected lines may contain any
    angle given.—9. If a strait line falling upon the circumference of a
    circle be produced till it reach the semidiameter, and that part of
    it, which is intercepted between the circumference and the
    semidiameter, be equal to that part of the semidiameter which is
    between the point of concourse and the centre, the reflected line
    will be parallel to the semidiameter.—10. If from a point within a
    circle, two strait lines be drawn to the circumference, and their
    reflected lines meet in the circumference of the same circle, the
    angle made by the reflected lines will be a third part of the angle
    made by the incident lines.


[Sidenote: Angles of incidence and reflection.]

Whether a body falling upon the superficies of another body and being
reflected from it, do make equal angles at that superficies, it belongs
not to this place to dispute, being a knowledge which depends upon the
natural causes of reflection; of which hitherto nothing has been said,
but shall be spoken of hereafter.

In this place, therefore, let it be supposed that the angle of incidence
is equal to the angle of reflection; that our present search may be
applied, not to the finding out of the causes, but some consequences of
the same.

I call an _angle of incidence_, that which is made between a strait line
and another line, strait or crooked, upon which it falls, and which I
call the _line reflecting_; and an _angle of reflection_ equal to it,
that which is made at the same point between the strait line which is
reflected and the line reflecting.

[Sidenote: If two strait lines falling upon another strait line be
           parallel, the lines reflected from them shall also be
           parallel.]

1. If two strait lines, which fall upon another strait line, be
parallel, their reflected lines shall be also parallel.

Let the two strait lines A B and C D (in fig. 1), which fall upon the
strait line E F, at the points B and D, be parallel; and let the lines
reflected from them be B G and D H. I say, B G and D H are also
parallel.

For the angles A B E and C D E are equal by reason of the parallelism of
A B and C D; and the angles G B F and H D F are equal to them by
supposition; for the lines B G and D H are reflected from the lines A B
and C D. Wherefore B G and D H are parallel.

[Sidenote: If two strait lines drawn from one point fall upon another
           strait line, the lines reflected from them, if they be drawn
           out the other way, will meet in an angle equal to the angle
           made by the lines of incidence.]

2. If two strait lines drawn from the same point fall upon another
strait line, the lines reflected from them, if they be drawn out the
other way, will meet in an angle equal to the angle of the incident
lines.

From the point A (in fig. 2) let the two strait lines A B and A D be
drawn; and let them fall upon the strait line E K at the points B and D;
and let the lines B I and D G be reflected from them. I say, I B and G D
do converge, and that if they be produced on the other side of the line
E K, they shall meet, as in F; and that the angle B F D shall be equal
to the angle B A D.

For the angle of reflection I B K is equal to the angle of incidence A B
E; and to the angle I B K its vertical angle E B F is equal; and
therefore the angle A B E is equal to the angle E B F. Again, the angle
A D E is equal to the angle of reflection G D K, that is, to its
vertical angle E D F; and therefore the two angles A B D and A D B of
the triangle A B D are one by one equal to the two angles F B D and F D
B of the triangle F B D; wherefore also the third angle B A D is equal
to the third angle B F D; which was to be proved.

Coroll. I. If the strait line A F be drawn, it will be perpendicular to
the strait line E K. For both the angles at E will be equal, by reason
of the equality of the two angles A B E and F B E, and of the two sides
A B and F B.

Coroll. II. If upon any point between B and D there fall a strait line,
as A C, whose reflected line is C H, this also produced beyond C, will
fall upon F; which is evident by the demonstration above.

[Sidenote: If two strait parallel lines, drawn not oppositely, but from
           the same parts, fall upon the circumference of a circle, the
           lines reflected from them, if produced they meet within the
           circle, will make an angle double to that which is made by
           two strait lines drawn from the centre to the points of
           incidence.]

3. If from two points taken without a circle, two strait parallel lines,
drawn not oppositely, but from the same parts, fall upon the
circumference; the lines reflected from them, if produced they meet
within the circle, will make an angle double to that which is made by
two strait lines drawn from the centre to the points of incidence.

Let the two strait parallels A B and D C (in fig. 3) fall upon the
circumference B C at the points B and C; and let the centre of the
circle be E; and let A B reflected be B F, and D C reflected be C G; and
let the lines F B and G C produced meet within the circle in H; and let
E B and E C be connected. I say the angle F H G is double to the angle B
E C.

For seeing A B and D C are parallels, and E B cuts A B in B, the same E
B produced will cut D C somewhere; let it cut it in D; and let D C be
produced howsoever to I, and let the intersection of D C and B F be at
K. The angle therefore I C H, being external to the triangle C K H, will
be equal to the two opposite angles C K H and C H K. Again, I C E being
external to the triangle C D E, is equal to the two angles at D and E.
Wherefore the angle I C H, being double to the angle I C E, is equal to
the angles at D and E twice taken; and therefore the two angles C K H
and C H K are equal to the two angles at D and E twice taken. But the
angle C K H is equal to the angles D and A B D, that is, D twice taken;
for A B and D C being parallels, the altern angles D and A B D are
equal. Wherefore C H K, that is the angle F H G is also equal to the
angle at E twice taken; which was to be proved.

Coroll. If from two points taken within a circle two strait parallels
fall upon the circumference, the lines reflected from them shall meet in
an angle, double to that which is made by two strait lines drawn from
the centre to the points of incidence. For the parallels A B and I C
falling upon the points B and C, are reflected in the lines B H and C H,
and make the angle at H double to the angle at E, as was but now
demonstrated.

[Sidenote: If two strait lines drawn from the same point without a circle fall upon the circumference, and the lines reflected from them being produced meet within
           the circle, they will make an angle equal to twice that angle, which is made by two strait lines drawn from the centre to the points of incidence, together with the angle which the incident lines themselves make.]

4. If two strait lines drawn from the same point without a circle fall
upon the circumference, and the lines reflected from them being produced
meet within the circle, they will make an angle equal to twice that
angle, which is made by two strait lines drawn from the centre to the
points of incidence, together with the angle which the incident lines
themselves make.

Let the two strait lines A B and A C (in fig. 4) be drawn from the point
A to the circumference of the circle, whose centre is D; and let the
lines reflected from them be B E and C G, and, being produced, make
within the circle the angle H; also let the two strait lines D B and D C
be drawn from the centre D to the points of incidence B and C. I say,
the angle H is equal to twice the angle at D together with the angle at
A.

For let A C be produced howsoever to I. Therefore the angle I C H, which
is external to the triangle C K H, will be equal to the two angles C K H
and C H K. Again, the angle I C D, which is external to the triangle C L
D, will be equal to the two angles C L D and C D L. But the angle I C H
is double to the angle I C D, and is therefore equal to the angles C L D
and C D L twice taken. Wherefore the angles C K H and C H K are equal to
the angles C L D and C D L twice taken. But the angle C L D, being
external to the triangle A L B, is equal to the two angles L A B and L B
A; and consequently C L D twice taken is equal to L A B and L B A twice
taken. Wherefore C K H and C H K are equal to the angle C D L together
with L A B and L B A twice taken. Also the angle C K H is equal to the
angle L A B once and A B K, that is, L B A twice taken. Wherefore the
angle C H K is equal to the remaining angle C D L, that is, to the angle
at D, twice taken, and the angle L A B, that is, the angle at A, once
taken; which was to be proved.

Coroll. If two strait converging lines, as I C and M B, fall upon the
concave circumference of a circle, their reflected lines, as C H and B
H, will meet in the angle H, equal to twice the angle D, together with
the angle at A made by the incident lines produced. Or, if the incident
lines be H B and I C, whose reflected lines C H and B M meet in the
point N, the angle C N B will be equal to twice the angle D, together
with the angle C K H made by the lines of incidence. For the angle C N B
is equal to the angle H, that is, to twice the angle D, together with
the two angles A, and N B H, that is, K B A. But the angles K B A and A
are equal to the angle C K H. Wherefore the angle C N B is equal to
twice the angle D, together with the angle C K H made by the lines of
incidence I C and H B produced to K.

[Sidenote: If two strait lines drawn from one point fall upon the
           concave circumference of a circle, and the angle they make be
           less than twice the angle at the centre, the lines reflected
           from them and meeting within the circle will make an angle,
           which being added to the angle of the incident lines will be
           equal to twice the angle at the centre.]

5. If two strait lines drawn from one point fall upon the concave
circumference of a circle, and the angle they make be less than twice
the angle at the centre, the lines reflected from them and meeting
within the circle will make an angle, which being added to the angle of
the incident lines, will be equal to twice the angle at the centre.

Let the two lines A B and A C (in fig. 5), drawn from the point A, fall
upon the concave circumference of the circle whose centre is D; and let
their reflected lines B E and C E meet in the point E; also let the
angle A be less than twice the angle D. I say, the angles A and E
together taken are equal to twice the angle D.

For let the strait lines A B and E C cut the strait lines D C and D B in
the points G and H; and the angle B H C will be equal to the two angles
E B H and E; also the same angle B H C will be equal to the two angles D
and D C H; and in like manner the angle B G C will be equal to the two
angles A C D and A, and the same angle B G C will be also equal to the
two angles D B G and D. Wherefore the four angles E B H, E, A C D and A,
are equal to the four angles D, D C H, D B G and D. If, therefore,
equals be taken away on both sides, namely, on one side A C D and E B H,
and on the other side D C H and D B G, (for the angle E B H is equal to
the angle D B G, and the angle A C D equal to the angle D C H), the
remainders on both sides will be equal, namely, on one side the angles A
and E, and on the other the angle D twice taken. Wherefore the angles A
and E are equal to twice the angle D.

Coroll. If the angle A be greater than twice the angle D, their
reflected lines will diverge. For, by the corollary of the third
proposition, if the angle A be equal to twice the angle D, the reflected
lines B E and C E will be parallel; and if it be less, they will concur,
as has now been demonstrated. And therefore, if it be greater, the
reflected lines B E and C E will diverge, and consequently, if they be
produced the other way, they will concur and make an angle equal to the
excess of the angle A above twice the angle D; as is evident by art. 4.

[Sidenote: If through any one point two unequal chords be drawn cutting
           one another, and the centre of the circle be not placed
           between them, and the lines reflected from them concur
           wheresoever, there cannot through the point, through which
           the two former lines were drawn, be drawn any other strait
           line whose reflected line shall pass through the common point
           of the two former lines reflected.]

6. If through any one point two unequal chords be drawn cutting one
another, either within the circle, or, if they be produced, without it,
and the centre of the circle be not placed between them, and the lines
reflected from them concur wheresoever; there cannot, through the point
through which the former lines were drawn, be drawn another strait line,
whose reflected line shall pass through the point where the two former
reflected lines concur.

Let any two unequal chords, as B K and C H (in fig. 6), be drawn through
the point A in the circle B C; and let their reflected lines B D and C E
meet in F; and let the centre not be between A B and A C; and from the
point A let any other strait line, as A G, be drawn to the circumference
between B and C. I say, G N, which passes through the point F, where the
reflected lines B D and C E meet, will not be the reflected line of A G.

For let the arch B L be taken equal to the arch B G, and the strait line
B M equal to the strait line B A; and L M being drawn, let it be
produced to the circumference in O. Seeing therefore B A and B M are
equal, and the arch B L equal to the arch B G, and the angle M B L equal
to the angle A B G, A G and M L will also be equal, and, producing G A
to the circumference in I, the whole lines L O and G I will in like
manner be equal. But L O is greater than G F N, as shall presently be
demonstrated; and therefore also G I is greater than G N. Wherefore the
angles N G C and I G B are not equal. Wherefore the line G F N is not
reflected from the line of incidence A G, and consequently no other
strait line, besides A B and A C, which is drawn through the point A,
and falls upon the circumference B C, can be reflected to the point F;
which was to be demonstrated.

It remains that I prove L O to be greater than G N; which I shall do in
this manner. L O and G N cut one another in P; and P L is greater than P
G. Seeing now L P. P G :: P N. P O are proportionals, therefore the two
extremes L P and P O together taken, that is L O, are greater than P G
and P N together taken, that is, G N; which remained to be proved.

[Sidenote: In equal chords the same is not true.]

7. But if two equal chords be drawn through one point within a circle,
and the lines reflected from them meet in another point, then another
strait line may be drawn between them through the former point, whose
reflected line shall pass through the latter point.

Let the two equal chords B C and E D (in the 7th figure) cut one another
in the point A within the circle B C D; and let their reflected lines C
H and D I meet in the point F. Then dividing the arch C D equally in G,
let the two chords G K and G L be drawn through the points A and F. I
say, G L will be the line reflected from the chord K G. For the four
chords B C, C H, E D and D I are by supposition all equal to one
another; and therefore the arch B C H is equal to the arch E D I; as
also the angle B C H to the angle E D I; and the angle A M C to its
verticle angle F M D; and the strait line D M to the strait line G M;
and, in like manner, the strait line A C to the strait line F D; and the
chords C G and G D being drawn, will also be equal; and also the angles
F D G and A C G, in the equal segments G D I and G C B. Wherefore the
strait lines F G and A G are equal; and, therefore, the angle F G D is
equal to the angle A G C, that is, the angle of incidence equal to the
angle of reflection. Wherefore the line G L is reflected from the
incident line C G; which was to be proved.

Coroll. By the very sight of the figure it is manifest, that if G be not
the middle point between C and D, the reflected line G L will not pass
through the point F.

[Sidenote: Two points being given in the circumference of a circle, to
           draw two strait lines to them so as that their reflected
           lines may contain any angle given.]

8. Two points in the circumference of a circle being given to draw two
strait lines to them, so as that their reflected lines may be parallel,
or contain any angle given.

In the circumference of the circle, whose centre is A, (in the 8th
figure) let the two points B and C be given; and let it be required to
draw to them from two points taken without the circle two incident
lines, so that their reflected lines may, first, be parallel.

Let A B and A C be drawn; as also any incident line D C, with its
reflected line C F; and let the angle E C D be made double to the angle
A; and let H B be drawn parallel to E C, and produced till it meet with
D C produced in I. Lastly, producing A B indefinitely to K, let G B be
drawn so that the angle G B K may be equal to the angle H B K, and then
G B will be the reflected line of the incident line H B. I say, D C and
H B are two incident lines, whose reflected lines C F and B G are
parallel.

For seeing the angle E C D is double to the angle B A C, the angle H I C
is also, by reason of the parallels E C and H I, double to the same B A
C; therefore also F C and G B, namely, the lines reflected from the
incident lines D C and H B, are parallel. Wherefore the first thing
required is done.

Secondly, let it be required to draw to the points B and C two strait
lines of incidence, so that the lines reflected from them may contain
the given angle Z.

To the angle E C D made at the point C, let there be added on one side
the angle D C L equal to half Z, and on the other side the angle E C M
equal to the angle D C L; and let the strait line B N be drawn parallel
to the strait line C M; and let the angle K B O be made equal to the
angle N B K; which being done, B O will be the line of reflection from
the line of incidence N B. Lastly, from the incident line L C, let the
reflected line C O be drawn, cutting B O at O, and making the angle C O
B. I say, the angle C O B is equal to the angle Z.

Let N B be produced till it meet with the strait line L C produced in P.
Seeing, therefore, the angle L C M is, by construction, equal to twice
the angle B A C, together with the angle Z; the angle N P L, which is
equal to L C M by reason of the parallels N P and M C, will also be
equal to twice the same angle B A C, together with the angle Z. And
seeing the two strait lines O C and O B fall from the point O upon the
points C and B; and their reflected lines L C and N B meet in the point
P; the angle N P L will be equal to twice the angle B A C together with
the angle C O B. But I have already proved the angle N P L to be equal
to twice the angle B A C together with the angle Z. Therefore the angle
C O B is equal to the angle Z; wherefore, two points in the
circumference of a circle being given, I have drawn, &c.; which was to
be done.

But if it be required to draw the incident lines from a point within the
circle, so that the lines reflected from them may contain an angle equal
to the angle Z, the same method is to be used, saving that in this case
the angle Z is not to be added to twice the angle B A C, but to be taken
from it.

[Sidenote: If a strait line falling upon the circumference of a circle
           be produced till it reach the semidiameter, and that part of
           it, which is intercepted between the circumference and the
           semidiameter, be equal to that part of the semidiameter which
           is between the point of concourse and the centre, the
           reflected line will be parallel to the semidiameter.]

9. If a strait line, falling upon the circumference of a circle, be
produced till it reach the semidiameter, and that part of it which is
intercepted between the circumference and the semidiameter be equal to
that part of the semidiameter which is between the point of concourse
and the centre, the reflected line will be parallel to the semidiameter.

Let any line A B (in the 9th figure) be the semidiameter of the circle
whose centre is A; and upon the circumference B D let the strait line C
D fall, and be produced till it cut A B in E, so that E D and E A may be
equal; and from the incident line C D let the line D F be reflected. I
say, A B and D F will be parallel.

Let A G be drawn through the point D. Seeing, therefore, E D and E A are
equal, the angles E D A and E A D will also be equal. But the angles F D
G and E D A are equal; for each of them is half the angle E D H or F D
C. Wherefore the angles F D G and E A D are equal; and consequently D F
and A B are parallel; which was to be proved.

Coroll. If E A be greater then E D, then D F and A B being produced will
concur; but if E A be less than E D, then B A and D H being produced
will concur.

[Sidenote: If from a point within a circle two strait lines be drawn to
           the circumference, and their reflected lines meet in the
           circumference of the same circle, the angle made by the
           reflected lines will be a third part of the angle made by the
           incident lines.]

10. If from a point within a circle two strait lines be drawn to the
circumference, and their reflected lines meet in the circumference of
the same circle, the angle made by the lines of reflection will be a
third part of the angle made by the lines of incidence.

From the point B (in the 10th figure) taken within the circle whose
centre is A, let the two strait lines B C and B D be drawn to the
circumference; and let their reflected lines C E and D E meet in the
circumference of the same circle at the point E. I say, the angle C E D
will be a third part of the angle C B D.

Let A C and A D be drawn. Seeing, therefore, the angles C E D and C B D
together taken are equal to twice the angle C A D (as has been
demonstrated in the 5th article); and the angle C A D twice taken is
quadruple to the angle C E D; the angles C E D and C B D together taken
will also be equal to the angle C E D four times taken; and therefore if
the angle C E D be taken away on both sides, there will remain the angle
C B D on one side, equal to the angle C E D thrice taken on the other
side; which was to be demonstrated.

Coroll. Therefore a point being given within a circle, there may be
drawn two lines from it to the circumference, so as their reflected
lines may meet in the circumference. For it is but trisecting the angle
C B D, which how it may be done shall be shown in the following chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  _Vol. 1. Lat. & Eng._
  C. XIX.
  _Fig. 1-10_
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XX.

                 OF THE DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, AND THE
                     DIVISION OF ANGLES OR ARCHES.

1. The dimension of a circle never determined in numbers by Archimedes
    and others.—2. The first attempt for the finding out of the
    dimension of a circle by lines.—3. The second attempt for the
    finding out of the dimension of a circle from the consideration of
    the nature of crookedness.—4. The third attempt; and some things
    propounded to be further searched into.—5. The equation of the
    spiral of Archimedes with a strait line.—6. Of the analysis of
    geometricians by the powers of lines.


[Sidenote: The dimension of a circle never determined in numbers by
           Archimedes and others.]

1. In the comparing of an arch of a circle with a strait line, many and
great geometricians, even from the most ancient times, have exercised
their wits; and more had done the same, if they had not seen their
pains, though undertaken for the common good, if not brought to
perfection, vilified by those that envy the praises of other men.
Amongst those ancient writers whose works are come to our hands,
Archimedes was the first that brought the length of the perimeter of a
circle within the limits of numbers very little differing from the
truth; demonstrating the same to be less than three diameters and a
seventh part, but greater than three diameters and ten seventy-one parts
of the diameter. So that supposing the radius to consist of 10,000,000
equal parts, the arch of a quadrant will be between 15,714,285 and
15,704,225 of the same parts. In our times, Ludovicus Van Cullen and
Willebrordus Snellius, with joint endeavour, have come yet nearer to the
truth; and pronounced from true principles, that the arch of a quadrant,
putting, as before, 10,000,000 for radius, differs not one whole unity
from the number 15,707,963; which, if they had exhibited their
arithmetical operations, and no man had discovered any error in that
long work of theirs, had been demonstrated by them. This is the furthest
progress that has been made by the way of numbers; and they that have
proceeded thus far deserve the praise of industry. Nevertheless, if we
consider the benefit, which is the scope at which all speculation should
aim, the improvement they have made has been little or none. For any
ordinary man may much sooner and more accurately find a strait line
equal to the perimeter of a circle, and consequently square the circle,
by winding a small thread about a given cylinder, than any geometrician
shall do the same by dividing the radius into 10,000,000 equal parts.
But though the length of the circumference were exactly set out, either
by numbers, or mechanically, or only by chance, yet this would
contribute no help at all towards the section of angles, unless happily
these two problems, _to divide a given angle according to any proportion
assigned_, and _to find a strait line equal to the arch of a circle_,
were reciprocal, and followed one another. Seeing therefore the benefit
proceeding from the knowledge of the length of the arch of a quadrant
consists in this, that we may thereby divide an angle according to any
proportion, either accurately, or at least accurately enough for common
use; and seeing this cannot be done by arithmetic, I thought fit to
attempt the same by geometry, and in this chapter to make trial whether
it might not be performed by the drawing of strait and circular lines.

[Sidenote: The first attempt for the finding out of the dimension of a
           circle by lines.]

2. Let the square A B C D (in the first figure) be described; and with
the radii A B, B C, and D C, the three arches B D, C A, and A C; of
which let the two B D and C A cut one another in E, and the two B D and
A C in F. The diagonals therefore B D and A C being drawn will cut one
another in the centre of the square G, and the two arches B D and C A in
two equal parts in H and Y; and the arch B H D will be trisected in F
and E. Through the centre G let the two strait lines K G L and M G N be
drawn parallel and equal to the sides of the square A B and A D, cutting
the four sides of the same square in the points K, L, M, and N; which
being done, K L will pass through F, and M N through E. Then let O P be
drawn parallel and equal to the side B C, cutting the arch B F D in F,
and the sides A B and D C in O and P. Therefore O F will be the sine of
the arch B F, which is an arch of 30 degrees; and the same O F will be
equal to half the radius. Lastly, dividing the arch B F in the middle in
Q, let R Q, the sine of the arch B Q, be drawn and produced to S, so
that Q S be equal to R Q, and consequently R S be equal to the chord of
the arch B F; and let F S be drawn and produced to T in the side B C. I
say, the strait line B T is equal to the arch B F; and consequently that
B V, the triple of B T, is equal to the arch of the quadrant B F E D.

Let T F be produced till it meet the side B A produced in X; and
dividing O F in the middle in Z, let Q Z be drawn and produced till it
meet with the side B A produced. Seeing therefore the strait lines R S
and O F are parallel, and divided in the midst in Q and Z, Q Z produced
will fall upon X, and X Z Q produced to the side B C will cut B T in the
midst in α.

Upon the strait line F Z, the fourth part of the radius A B, let the
equilateral triangle _a_ Z F be constituted; and upon the centre _a_,
with the radius _a_ Z, let the arch Z F be drawn; which arch Z F will
therefore be equal to the arch Q F, the half of the arch B F. Again, let
the strait line Z O be cut in the midst in _b_, and the strait line _b_
O in the midst in _c_; and let the bisection be continued in this manner
till the last part O _c_ be the least that can possibly be taken; and
upon it, and all the rest of the parts equal to it into which the strait
line O F may be cut, let so many equilateral triangles be understood to
be constituted; of which let the last be _d_ O _c_. If, therefore, upon
the centre _d_, with the radius _d_ O, be drawn the arch O _c_, and upon
the rest of the equal parts of the strait line O F be drawn in like
manner so many equal arches, all those arches together taken will be
equal to the whole arch B F, and the half of them, namely, those that
are comprehended between O and Z, or between Z and F, will be equal to
the arch B Q or Q F, and in sum, what part soever the strait line O _c_
be of the strait line O F, the same part will the arch O _c_ be of the
arch B F, though both the arch and the chord be infinitely bisected. Now
seeing the arch O _c_ is more crooked than that part of the arch B F
which is equal to it; and seeing also that the more the strait line X
_c_ is produced, the more it diverges from the strait line X O, if the
points O and _c_ be understood to be moved forwards with strait motion
in X O and X _c_, the arch O _c_ will thereby be extended by little and
little, till at the last it come somewhere to have the same crookedness
with that part of the arch B F which is equal to it. In like manner, if
the strait line X _b_ be drawn, and the point _b_ be understood to be
moved forwards at the same time, the arch _c b_ will also by little and
little be extended, till its crookedness come to be equal to the
crookedness of that part of the arch B F which is equal to it. And the
same will happen in all those small equal arches which are described
upon so many equal parts of the strait line O F. It is also manifest,
that by strait motion in X O and X Z all those small arches will lie in
the arch B F, in the points B, Q and F. And though the same small equal
arches should not be coincident with the equal parts of the arch B F in
all the other points thereof, yet certainly they will constitute two
crooked lines, not only equal to the two arches B Q and Q F, and equally
crooked, but also having their cavity towards the same parts; which how
it should be, unless all those small arches should be coincident with
the arch B F in all its points, is not imaginable. They are therefore
coincident, and all the strait lines drawn from X, and passing through
the points of division of the strait line O F, will also divide the arch
B F into the same proportions into which O F is divided.

Now seeing X _b_ cuts off from the point B the fourth part of the arch B
F, let that fourth part be B _e_; and let the sine thereof, _f e_, be
produced to F T in _g_, for so _f e_ will be the fourth part of the
strait line _f g_, because as O _b_ is to O F, so is _f e_ to _f g_. But
B T is greater than _f g_; and therefore the same B T is greater than
four sines of the fourth part of the arch B F. And in like manner, if
the arch B F be subdivided into any number of equal parts whatsoever, it
may be proved that the strait line B T is greater than the sine of one
of those small arches, so many times taken as there be parts made of the
whole arch B F. Wherefore the strait line B T is not less than the arch
B F. But neither can it be greater, because if any strait line
whatsoever, less than B T, be drawn below B T, parallel to it, and
terminated in the strait lines X B and X T, it would cut the arch B F;
and so the sine of some one of the parts of the arch B F, taken so often
as that small arch is found in the whole arch B F, would be greater than
so many of the same arches; which is absurd. Wherefore the strait line B
T is equal to the arch B F; and the strait line B V equal to the arch of
the quadrant B F D; and B V four times taken, equal to the perimeter of
the circle described with the radius A B. Also the arch B F and the
strait line B T are everywhere divided into the same proportions; and
consequently any given angle, whether greater or less than B A F, may be
divided into any proportion given.

But the strait line B V, though its magnitude fall within the terms
assigned by Archimedes, is found, if computed by the canon of signs, to
be somewhat greater than that which is exhibited by the Rudolphine
numbers. Nevertheless, if in the place of B T, another strait line,
though never so little less, be substituted, the division of angles is
immediately lost, as may by any man be demonstrated by this very scheme.

Howsoever, if any man think this my strait line B V to be too great,
yet, seeing the arch and all the parallels are everywhere so exactly
divided, and B V comes so near to the truth, I desire he would search
out the reason, why, granting B V to be precisely true, the arches cut
off should not be equal.

But some man may yet ask the reason why the strait lines, drawn from X
through the equal parts of the arch B F, should cut off in the tangent B
V so many strait lines equal to them, seeing the connected straight line
X V passes not through the point D, but cuts the strait line A D
produced in _l_; and consequently require some determination of this
problem. Concerning which, I will say what I think to be the reason,
namely, that whilst the magnitude of the arch doth not exceed the
magnitude of the radius, that is, the magnitude of the tangent B C, both
the arch and the tangent are cut alike by the strait lines drawn from X;
otherwise not. For A V being connected, cutting the arch B H D in I, if
X C being drawn should cut the same arch in the same point I, it would
be as true that the arch B I is equal to the radius B C, as it is true
that the arch B F is equal to the strait line B T; and drawing X K it
would cut the arch B I in the midst in _i_; also drawing A _i_ and
producing it to the tangent B C in _k_, the strait line B _k_ will be
the tangent of the arch B _i_, (which arch is equal to half the radius)
and the same strait line B _k_ will be equal to the strait line _k_ I. I
say all this is true, if the preceding demonstration be true; and
consequently the proportional section of the arch and its tangent
proceeds hitherto. But it is manifest by the golden rule, that taking B
_h_ double to B T, the line X _h_ shall not cut off the arch B E, which
is double to the arch B F, but a much greater. For the magnitude of the
straight lines X M, X B, and M E, being known (in numbers), the
magnitude of the strait line cut off in the tangent by the strait line X
E produced to the tangent, may also be known; and it will be found to be
less than B _h_; Wherefore the strait line X _h_ being drawn, will cut
off a part of the arch of the quadrant greater than the arch B E. But I
shall speak more fully in the next article concerning the magnitude of
the arch B I.

And let this be the first attempt for the finding out of the dimension
of a circle by the section of the arch B F.

[Sidenote: The second attempt for the finding out of the dimension of a
           circle from the consideration of the nature of crookedness.]

3. I shall now attempt the same by arguments drawn from the nature of
the crookedness of the circle itself; but I shall first set down some
premises necessary for this speculation; and

First, if a strait line be bowed into an arch of a circle equal to it,
as when a stretched thread, which toucheth a right cylinder, is so bowed
in every point, that it be everywhere coincident with the perimeter of
the base of the cylinder, the flexion of that line will be equal, in all
its points; and consequently the crookedness of the arch of a circle is
everywhere uniform; which needs no other demonstration than this, that
the perimeter of a circle is an uniform line.

Secondly, and consequently: if two unequal arches of the same circle be
made by the bowing of two strait lines equal to them, the flexion of the
longer line, whilst it is bowed into the greater arch, is greater than
the flexion of the shorter line, whilst it is bowed into the lesser
arch, according to the proportion of the arches themselves; and
consequently, the crookedness of the greater arch is to the crookedness
of the lesser arch, as the greater arch is to the lesser arch.

Thirdly: if two unequal circles and a strait line touch one another in
the same point, the crookedness of any arch taken in the lesser circle,
will be greater than the crookedness of an arch equal to it taken in the
greater circle, in reciprocal proportion to that of the radii with which
the circles are described; or, which is all one, any strait line being
drawn from the point of contact till it cut both the circumferences, as
the part of that strait line cut off by the circumference of the greater
circle to that part which is cut off by the circumference of the lesser
circle.

For let A B and A C (in the second figure) be two circles, touching one
another, and the strait line A D in the point A; and let their centres
be E and F; and let it be supposed, that as A E is to A F, so is the
arch A B to the arch A H. I say the crookedness of the arch A C is to
the crookedness of the arch A H, as A E is to A F. For let the strait
line A D be supposed to be equal to the arch A B, and the strait line A
G to the arch A C; and let A D, for example, be double to A G.
Therefore, by reason of the likeness of the arches A B and A C, the
strait line A B will be double to the strait line A C, and the radius A
E double to the radius A F, and the arch A B double to the arch A H. And
because the strait line A D is so bowed to be coincident with the arch A
B equal to it, as the strait line A G is bowed to be coincident with the
arch A C equal also to it, the flexion of the strait line A G into the
crooked line A C will be equal to the flexion of the strait line A D
into the crooked line A B. But the flexion of the strait line A D into
the crooked line A B is double to the flexion of the strait line A G
into the crooked line A H; and therefore the flexion of the strait line
A G into the crooked line A C is double to the flexion of the same
strait line A G into the crooked line A H. Wherefore, as the arch A B is
to the arch A C or A H; or as the radius A E is to the radius A F; or as
the chord A B is to the chord A C; so reciprocally is the flexion or
uniform crookedness of the arch A C, to the flexion or uniform
crookedness of the arch A H, namely, here double. And this may by the
same method be demonstrated in circles whose perimeters are to one
another triple, quadruple, or in whatsoever given proportion. The
crookedness therefore of two equal arches taken in several circles are
in proportion reciprocal to that of their radii, or like arches, or like
chords; which was to be demonstrated.

Let the square A B C D be again described (in the third figure), and in
it the quadrants A B D, B C A and D A C; and dividing each side of the
square A B C D in the midst in E, F, G and H, let E G and F H be
connected, which will cut one another in the centre of the square at I,
and divide the arch of the quadrant A B D into three equal parts in K
and L. Also the diagonals A C and B D being drawn will cut one another
in I, and divide the arches B K D and C L A into two equal parts in M
and N. Then with the radius B F let the arch F E be drawn, cutting the
diagonal B D in O; and dividing the arch B M in the midst in P, let the
strait line E _a_ equal to the chord B P be set off from the point E in
the arch E F, and let the arch _a b_ be taken equal to the arch O _a_,
and let B _a_ and B _b_ be drawn and produced to the arch A N in _c_ and
_d_; and lastly, let the strait line A _d_ be drawn. I say the strait
line A _d_ is equal to the arch A N or B M.

I have proved in the preceding article, that the arch E O is twice as
crooked as the arch B P, that is to say, that the arch E O is so much
more crooked than the arch B P, as the arch B P is more crooked than the
strait line E _a_. The crookedness therefore of the chord E _a_, of the
arch B P, and of the arch E O, are as 0, 1, 2. Also the difference
between the arches E O and E O, the difference between the arches E O
and E _a_, and the difference between the arches E O and E _b_, are as
0, 1, 2. So also the difference between the arches A N and A N, the
difference between the arches A N and A _c_, and the difference between
the arches A N and A _d_, are as 0, 1, 2; and the strait line A _c_ is
double to the chord B P or E _a_, and the strait line A _d_ double to
the chord E _b_.

Again, let the strait line B F be divided in the midst in Q, and the
arch B P in the midst in R; and describing the quadrant B Q S (whose
arch Q S is a fourth part of the arch of the quadrant B M D, as the arch
B R is a fourth part of the arch B M, which is the arch of the
semiquadrant A B M) let the chord S _e_ equal to the chord B R be set
off from the point S in the arch S Q; and let B _e_ be drawn and
produced to the arch A N in _f_; which being done, the strait line A _f_
will be quadruple to the chord B R or S _e_. And seeing the crookedness
of the arch S _e_, or of the arch A _c_, is double to the crookedness of
the arch B R, the excess of the crookedness of the arch A _f_ above the
crookedness of the arch A _c_ will be subduple to the excess of the
crookedness of the arch A _c_ above the crookedness of the arch A N; and
therefore the arch N _c_ will be double to the arch _c f_. Wherefore the
arch _c d_ is divided in the midst in _f_, and the arch N _f_ is ¾ of
the arch N _d_. And in like manner if the arch B R be bisected in V, and
the strait line B Q in X, and the quadrant B X Y be described, and the
strait line Y _g_ equal to the chord B V be set off from the point Y in
the arch Y X, it may be demonstrated that the strait line B _g_ being
drawn and produced to the arch A N, will cut the arch _f d_ into two
equal parts, and that a strait line drawn from A to the point of that
section, will be equal to eight chords of the arch B V, and so on
perpetually; and consequently, that the strait line A _d_ is equal to so
many equal chords of equal parts of the arch B M, as may be made by
infinite bisections. Wherefore the strait line A _d_ is equal to the
arch B M or A N, that is, to half the arch of the quadrant A B D or B C
A.

Coroll. An arch being given not greater than the arch of a quadrant (for
being made greater, it comes again towards the radius B A produced, from
which it receded before) if a strait line double to the chord of half
the given arch be adapted from the beginning of the arch, and by how
much the arch that is subtended by it is greater than the given arch, by
so much a greater arch be subtended by another strait line, this strait
line shall be equal to the first given arch.

Supposing the strait line B V (in fig. 1) be equal to the arch of the
quadrant B H D, and A V be connected cutting the arch B H D in I, it may
be asked what proportion the arch B I has to the arch I D. Let therefore
the arch A Y be divided in the midst in _o_, and in the strait line A D
let A _p_ be taken equal, and A _q_ double to the drawn chord A _o_.
Then upon the centre A, with the radius A _q_, let an arch of a circle
be drawn cutting the arch A Y in _r_, and let the arch Y _r_ be doubled
at _t_; which being done, the drawn strait line A _t_ (by what has been
last demonstrated) will be equal to the arch A Y. Again, upon the centre
A with the radius A _t_ let the arch _t u_ be drawn cutting A D in _u_;
and the strait line A _u_ will be equal to the arch A Y. From the point
_u_ let the strait line _u s_ be drawn equal and parallel to the strait
line A B, cutting M N in _x_, and bisected by M N in the same point _x_.
Therefore the strait line A _x_ being drawn and produced till it meet
with B C produced in V, it will cut off B V double to B _s_, that is,
equal to the arch B H D. Now let the point, where the strait line A V
cuts the arch B H D, be I; and let the arch D I be divided in the midst
in _y_; and in the strait line D C, let D _z_ be taken equal, and D δ
double to the drawn chord D _y_; and upon the centre D with the radius D
δ let an arch of a circle be drawn cutting the arch B H D in the point
_n_; and let the arch _n m_ be taken equal to the arch I _n_; which
being done, the strait line D _m_ will (by the last foregoing corollary)
be equal to the arch D I. If now the strait lines D _m_ and C V be
equal, the arch B I will be equal to the radius A B or B C; and
consequently X C being drawn, will pass through the point I. Moreover,
if the semicircle B H D ϐ being completed, the strait lines ϐ I and B I
be drawn, making a right angle (in the semicircle) at I, and the arch B
I be divided in the midst at _i_, it will follow that A _i_ being
connected will be parallel to the strait line ϐ I, and being produced to
B C in _k_, will cut off the strait line B _k_ equal to the strait line
_k_ I, and equal also to the strait line A γ cut off in A D by the
strait line ϐ I. All which is manifest, supposing the arch B I and the
radius B C to be equal.

But that the arch B I and the radius B C are precisely equal, cannot
(how true soever it be) be demonstrated, unless that be first proved
which is contained in art. 1, namely, that the strait lines drawn from X
through the equal parts of O F (produced to a certain length) cut off so
many parts also in the tangent B C severally equal to the several arches
cut off; which they do most exactly as far as B C in the tangent, and B
I in the arch B E; insomuch that no inequality between the arch B I and
the radius B C can be discovered either by the hand or by ratiocination.
It is therefore to be further enquired, whether the strait line A V cut
the arch of the quadrant in I in the same proportion as the point C
divides the strait line B V, which is equal to the arch of the quadrant.
But however this be, it has been demonstrated that the strait line B V
is equal to the arch B H D.

[Sidenote: The third attempt; and some things propounded to be further
           searched into.]

4. I shall now attempt the same dimension of a circle another way,
assuming the two following lemmas.

Lemma I. If to the arch of a quadrant, and the radius, there be taken in
continual proportion a third line Z; then the arch of the semiquadrant,
half the chord of the quadrant, and Z, will also be in continual
proportion.

For seeing the radius is a mean proportional between the chord of a
quadrant and its semichord, and the same radius a mean proportional
between the arch of the quadrant and Z, the square of the radius will be
equal as well to the rectangle made of the chord and semichord of the
quadrant, as to the rectangle made of the arch of the quadrant and Z;
and these two rectangles will be equal to one another. Wherefore, as the
arch of a quadrant is to its chord, so reciprocally is half the chord of
the quadrant to Z. But as the arch of the quadrant is to its chord, so
is half the arch of the quadrant to half the chord of the quadrant.
Wherefore, as half the arch of the quadrant is to half the chord of the
quadrant (or to the sine of 45 degrees), so is half the chord of the
quadrant to Z; which was to be proved.

Lemma II. The radius, the arch of the semiquadrant, the sine of 45
degrees, and the semiradius, are proportional.

For seeing the sine of 45 degrees is a mean proportional between the
radius and the semiradius; and the same sine of 45 degrees is also a
mean proportional (by the precedent lemma) between the arch of 45
degrees and Z; the square of the sine of 45 degrees will be equal as
well to the rectangle made of the radius and semiradius, as to the
rectangle made of the arch of 45 degrees and Z. Wherefore, as the radius
is to the arch of 45 degrees, so reciprocally is Z to the semiradius;
which was to be demonstrated.

Let now A B C D (in fig. 4) be a square; and with the radii A B, B C and
D A, let the three quadrants A B D, B C A and D A C, be described; and
let the strait lines E F and G H, drawn parallel to the sides B C and A
B, divide the square A B C D into four equal squares. They will
therefore cut the arch of the quadrant A B D into three equal parts in I
and K, and the arch of the quadrant B C A into three equal parts in K
and L. Also let the diagonals A C and B D be drawn, cutting the arches B
I D and A L C in M and N. Then upon the centre H with the radius H F
equal to half the chord of the arch B M D, or to the sine of 45 degrees,
let the arch F O be drawn cutting the arch C K in O; and let A O be
drawn and produced till it meet with B C produced in P; also let it cut
the arch B M D in Q, and the strait line D C in R. If now the strait
line H Q be equal to the strait line D R, and being produced to D C in
S, cut off D S equal to half the strait line B P; I say then the strait
line B P will be equal to the arch B M D.

For seeing P B A and A D R are like triangles, it will be as P B to the
radius B A or A D, so A D to D R; and therefore as well P B, A D and D
R, as P B, A D (or A Q) and Q H are in continual proportion; and
producing H O to D C in T, D T will be equal to the sine of 45 degrees,
as shall by and by be demonstrated. Now D S, D T and D R are in
continual proportion by the first lemma; and by the second lemma D C. D
S:: D R. D F are proportionals. And thus it will be, whether B P be
equal or not equal to the arch of the quadrant B M D. But if they be
equal, it will then be, as that part of the arch B M D which is equal to
the radius, is to the remainder of the same arch B M D; so A Q to H Q,
or so B C to C P. And then will B P and the arch B M D be equal. But it
is not demonstrated that the strait lines H Q and D R are equal; though
if from the point B there be drawn (by the construction of fig. 1) a
strait line equal to the arch B M D, then D R to H Q, and also the half
of the strait line B P to D S, will always be so equal, that no
inequality can be discovered between them. I will therefore leave this
to be further searched into. For though it be almost out of doubt, that
the strait line B P and the arch B M D are equal, yet that may not be
received without demonstration; and means of demonstration the circular
line admitteth none that is not grounded upon the nature of flexion, or
of angles. But by that way I have already exhibited a strait line equal
to the arch of a quadrant in the first and second aggression.

It remains that I prove D T to be equal to the sine of 45 degrees.

In B A produced let A V be taken equal to the sine of 45 degrees; and
drawing and producing V H, it will cut the arch of the quadrant C N A in
the midst in N, and the same arch again in O, and the strait line D C in
T, so that D T will be equal to the sine of 45 degrees, or to the strait
line A V; also the strait line V H will be equal to the strait line H I,
or the sine of 60 degrees.

For the square of A V is equal to two squares of the semiradius; and
consequently the square of V H is equal to three squares of the
semiradius. But H I is a mean proportional between the semiradius and
three semiradii; and, therefore, the square of H I is equal to three
squares of the semiradius. Wherefore H I is equal to H V. But because A
D is cut in the midst in H, therefore V H and H T are equal; and,
therefore, also D T is equal to the sine of 45 degrees. In the radius B
A let B X be taken equal to the sine of 45 degrees; for so V X will be
equal to the radius; and it will be as V A to A H the semiradius, so V X
the radius to X N the sine of 45 degrees. Wherefore V H produced passes
through N. Lastly, upon the centre V with the radius V A let the arch of
a circle be drawn cutting V H in Y; which being done, V Y will be equal
to H O (for H O is, by construction, equal to the sine of 45 degrees)
and Y H will be equal to O T; and, therefore, V T passes through O. All
which was to be demonstrated.

I will here add certain problems, of which if any analyst can make the
construction, he will thereby be able to judge clearly of what I have
now said concerning the dimension of a circle. Now these problems are
nothing else (at least to sense) but certain symptoms accompanying the
construction of the first and third figure of this chapter.

Describing, therefore, again, the square A B C D (in fig. 5) and the
three quadrants A B D, B C A and D A C, let the diagonals A C and B D be
drawn, cutting the arches B H D and C I A in the middle in H and I; and
the strait lines E F and G L, dividing the square A B C D into four
equal squares, and trisecting the arches B H D and C I A, namely, B H D
in K and M, and C I A in M and O. Then dividing the arch B K in the
midst in P, let Q P the sine of the arch B P, be drawn and produced to
R, so that Q R be double to Q P; and, connecting K R, let it be produced
one way to B C in S, and the other way to B A produced in T. Also let B
V be made triple to B S, and consequently, (by the second article of
this chapter) equal to the arch B D. This construction is the same with
that of the first figure, which I thought fit to renew discharged of all
lines but such as are necessary for my present purpose.

In the first place, therefore, if A V be drawn, cutting the arch B H D
in X, and the side D C in Z, I desire some analyst would, if he can,
give a reason why the strait lines T E and T C should cut the arch B D,
the one in Y, the other in X, so as to make the arch B Y equal to the
arch Y X; or if they be not equal, that he would determine their
difference.

Secondly, if in the side D A, the strait line D _a_ be taken equal to D
Z, and V _a_ be drawn; why V _a_ and V B should be equal; or if they be
not equal, what is the difference.

Thirdly, drawing Z _b_ parallel and equal to the side C B, cutting the
arch B H D in _c_, and drawing the strait line A _c_, and producing it
to B V in _d_; why A _d_ should be equal and parallel to the strait line
_a_ V, and consequently equal also to the arch B D.

Fourthly, drawing _e_ K the sine of the arch B K, and taking (in _e_ A
produced) _e f_ equal to the diagonal A C, and connecting _f_ C; why _f_
C should pass through _a_ (which point being given, the length of the
arch B H D is also given) and _c_; and why _f e_ and _f c_ should be
equal; or if not, why unequal.

Fifthly, drawing _f_ Z, I desire he would show, why it is equal to B V,
or to the arch B D; or if they be not equal, what is their difference.

Sixthly, granting _f_ Z to be equal to the arch B D, I desire he would
determine whether it fall all without the arch B C A, or cut the same,
or touch it, and in what point.

Seventhly, the semicircle B D _g_ being completed, why _g_ I being drawn
and produced, should pass through X, by which point X the length of the
arch B D is determined. And the same _g_ I being yet further produced to
D C in _h_, why A _d_, which is equal to the arch B D, should pass
through that point _h_.

Eighthly, upon the centre of the square A B C D, which let be _k_, the
arch of the quadrant E _i_ L being drawn, cutting _e_ K produced in _i_,
why the drawn strait line _i_ X should be parallel to the side C D.

Ninthly, in the sides B A and B C taking _g l_ and B _m_ severally equal
to half B V, or to the arch B H, and drawing _m n_ parallel and equal to
the side B A, cutting the arch B D in _o_, why the strait line which
connects V _l_ should pass through the point _o_.

Tenthly, I would know of him why the strait line which connects _a_ H
should be equal to B _m_; or if not, how much it differs from it.

The analyst that can solve these problems without knowing first the
length of the arch B D, or using any other known method than that which
proceeds by perpetual bisection of an angle, or is drawn from the
consideration of the nature of flexion, shall do more than ordinary
geometry is able to perform. But if the dimension of a circle cannot be
found by any other method, then I have either found it, or it is not at
all to be found.

From the known length of the arch of a quadrant, and from the
proportional division of the arch and of the tangent B C, may be deduced
the section of an angle into any given proportion; as also the squaring
of the circle, the squaring of a given sector, and many the like
propositions, which it is not necessary here to demonstrate. I will,
therefore, only exhibit a strait line equal to the spiral of Archimedes,
and so dismiss this speculation.

[Sidenote: The equation of the spiral of Archimedes with a strait line.]

5. The length of the perimeter of a circle being found, that strait line
is also found, which touches a spiral at the end of its first
conversion. For upon the centre A (in fig. 6) let the circle B C D E be
described; and in it let Archimedes' spiral A F G H B be drawn,
beginning at A and ending at B. Through the centre A let the strait line
C E be drawn, cutting the diameter B D at right angles; and let it be
produced to I, so that A I be equal to the perimeter B C D E B.
Therefore I B being drawn will touch the spiral A F G H B in B; which is
demonstrated by Archimedes in his book _De Spiralibus_.

And for a strait line equal to the given spiral A F G H B, it may be
found thus.

Let the strait line A I, which is equal to the perimeter B C D E, be
bisected in K; and taking K L equal to the radius A B, let the rectangle
I L be completed. Let M L be understood to be the axis, and K L the base
of a parabola, and let M K be the crooked line thereof. Now if the point
M be conceived to be so moved by the concourse of two movents, the one
from I M to K L with velocity encreasing continually in the same
proportion with the times, the other from M L to I K uniformly, that
both those motions begin together in M and end in K; Galilæus has
demonstrated that by such motion of the point M, the crooked line of a
parabola will be described. Again, if the point A be conceived to be
moved uniformly in the strait line A B, and in the same time to be
carried round upon the centre A by the circular motion of all the points
between A and B; Archimedes has demonstrated that by such motion will be
described a spiral line. And seeing the circles of all these motions are
concentric in A; and the interior circle is always less than the
exterior in the proportion of the times in which A B is passed over with
uniform motion; the velocity also of the circular motion of the point A
will continually increase proportionally to the times. And thus far the
generations of the parabolical line M K, and of the spiral line A F G H
B, are like. But the uniform motion in A B concurring with circular
motion in the perimeters of all the concentric circles, describes that
circle, whose centre is A, and perimeter B C D E; and, therefore, that
circle is (by the coroll. of art. 1, chap, XVI) the aggregate of all the
velocities together taken of the point A whilst it describes the spiral
A F G H B. Also the rectangle I K L M is the aggregate of all the
velocities together taken of the point M, whilst it describes the
crooked line M K. And, therefore the whole velocity by which the
parabolical line M K is described, is to the whole velocity with which
the spiral line A F G H B is described in the same time, as the
rectangle I K L M is to the circle B C D E, that is to the triangle A I
B. But because A I is bisected in K, and the strait lines I M and A B
are equal, therefore the rectangle I K L M and the triangle A I B are
also equal. Wherefore the spiral line A F G H B, and the parabolical
line M K, being described with equal velocity and in equal times, are
equal to one another. Now, in the first article of chap. XVIII, a strait
line is found out equal to any parabolical line. Wherefore also a strait
line is found out equal to a given spiral line of the first revolution
described by Archimedes; which was to be done.

[Sidenote: Of the analysis of geometricians by the powers of lines.]

6. In the sixth chapter, which is of _Method_, that which I should there
have spoken of the analytics of geometricians I thought fit to defer,
because I could not there have been understood, as not having then so
much as named _lines_, _superficies_, _solids_, _equal_ and _unequal_,
_&c._ Wherefore I will in this place set down my thoughts concerning it.

_Analysis_ is continual reasoning from the definitions of the terms of a
proposition we suppose true, and again from the definitions of the terms
of those definitions, and so on, till we come to some things known, the
composition whereof is the demonstration of the truth or falsity of the
first supposition; and this composition or demonstration is that we call
_Synthesis_. _Analytica_, therefore, is that art, by which our reason
proceeds from something supposed, to principles, that is, to prime
propositions, or to such as are known by these, till we have so many
known propositions as are sufficient for the demonstration of the truth
or falsity of the thing supposed. _Synthetica_ is the art itself of
demonstration. Synthesis, therefore, and analysis, differ in nothing,
but in proceeding forwards or backwards; and _Logistica_ comprehends
both. So that in the analysis or synthesis of any question, that is to
say, of any problem, the terms of all the propositions ought to be
convertible; or if they be enunciated hypothetically, the truth of the
consequent ought not only to follow out of the truth of its antecedent,
but contrarily also the truth of the antecedent must necessarily be
inferred from the truth of the consequent. For otherwise, when by
resolution we are arrived at principles, we cannot by composition return
directly back to the thing sought for. For those terms which are the
first in analysis, will be the last in synthesis; as for example, when
in _resolving_, we say, these two rectangles are equal, and therefore
their sides are reciprocally proportional, we must necessarily in
_compounding_ say, the sides of these rectangles are reciprocally
proportional, and therefore the rectangles themselves are equal; which
we could not say, unless _rectangles have their sides reciprocally
proportional_, and _rectangles are equal_, were terms convertible.

Now in every analysis, that which is sought is the proportion of two
quantities; by which proportion, a figure being described, the quantity
sought for may be exposed to sense. And this _exposition_ is the end and
solution of the question, or the construction of the problem.

And seeing analysis is reasoning from something supposed, till we come
to principles, that is, to definitions, or to theorems formerly known;
and seeing the same reasoning tends in the last place to some equation,
we can therefore make no end of resolving, till we come at last to the
causes themselves of equality and inequality, or to theorems formerly
demonstrated from those causes; and so have a sufficient number of those
theorems for the demonstration of the thing sought for.

And seeing also, that the end of the analytics is either the
construction of such a problem as is possible, or the detection of the
impossibility thereof; whensoever the problem may be solved, the analyst
must not stay, till he come to those things which contain the efficient
cause of that whereof he is to make construction. But he must of
necessity stay, when he comes to prime propositions; and these are
definitions. These definitions therefore must contain the efficient
cause of his construction; I say of his construction, not of the
conclusion which he demonstrates; for the cause of the conclusion is
contained in the premised propositions; that is to say, the truth of the
proposition he proves is drawn from the propositions which prove the
same. But the cause of his construction is in the things themselves, and
consists in motion, or in the concourse of motions. Wherefore those
propositions, in which analysis ends, are definitions, but such as
signify in what manner the construction or generation of the thing
proceeds. For otherwise, when he goes back by synthesis to the proof of
his problem, he will come to no demonstration at all; there being no
true demonstration but such as is scientifical; and no demonstration is
scientifical, but that which proceeds from the knowledge of the causes
from which the construction of the problem is drawn. To collect
therefore what has been said into few words; ANALYSIS _is ratiocination
from the supposed construction or generation of a thing to the efficient
cause or coefficient causes of that which is constructed or generated.
And_ SYNTHESIS _is ratiocination from the first causes of the
construction, continued through all the middle causes till we come to
the thing itself which is constructed or generated_.

But because there are many means by which the same thing may be
generated, or the same problem be constructed, therefore neither do all
geometricians, nor doth the same geometrician always, use one and the
same method. For, if to a certain quantity given, it be required to
construct another quantity equal, there may be some that will inquire
whether this may not be done by means of some motion. For there are
quantities, whose equality and inequality may be argued from motion and
time, as well as from congruence; and there is motion, by which two
quantities, whether lines or superficies, though one of them be crooked,
the other strait, may be made congruous or coincident. And this method
Archimedes made use of in his book _De Spiralibus_. Also the equality or
inequality of two quantities may be found out and demonstrated from the
consideration of weight, as the same Archimedes did in his quadrature of
the parabola. Besides, equality and inequality are found out often by
the division of the two quantities into parts which are considered as
indivisable; as Cavallerius Bonaventura has done in our time, and
Archimedes often. Lastly, the same is performed by the consideration of
the powers of lines, or the roots of those powers, and by the
multiplication, division, addition, and subtraction, as also by the
extraction of the roots of those powers, or by finding where strait
lines of the same proportion terminate. For example, when any number of
strait lines, how many soever, are drawn from a strait line and pass all
through the same point, look what proportion they have, and if their
parts continued from the point retain everywhere the same proportion,
they shall all terminate in a strait line. And the same happens if the
point be taken between two circles. So that the places of all their
points of termination make either strait lines, or circumferences of
circles, and are called _plane places_. So also when strait parallel
lines are applied to one strait line, if the parts of the strait line to
which they are applied be to one another in proportion duplicate to that
of the contiguous applied lines, they will all terminate in a conical
section; which section, being the place of their termination, is called
a _solid place_, because it serves for the finding out of the quantity
of any equation which consists of three dimensions. There are therefore
three ways of finding out the cause of equality or inequality between
two given quantities; namely, first, by the computation of _motions_;
for by equal motion, and equal time, equal spaces are described; and
ponderation is motion. Secondly, by _indivisibles_: because all the
parts together taken are equal to the whole. And thirdly, by the
_powers_: for when they are equal, their roots also are equal; and
contrarily, the powers are equal, when their roots are equal. But if the
question be much complicated, there cannot by any of these ways be
constituted a certain rule, from the supposition of which of the unknown
quantities the analysis may best begin; nor out of the variety of
equations, that at first appear, which we were best to choose; but the
success will depend upon dexterity, upon formerly acquired science, and
many times upon fortune.

For no man can ever be a good analyst without being first a good
geometrician; nor do the rules of analysis make a geometrician, as
synthesis doth; which begins at the very elements, and proceeds by a
logical use of the same. For the true teaching of geometry is by
synthesis, according to Euclid's method; and he that hath Euclid for his
master, may be a geometrician without Vieta, though Vieta was a most
admirable geometrician; but he that has Vieta for his master, not so,
without Euclid.

And as for that part of analysis which works by the powers, though it be
esteemed by some geometricians, not the chiefest, to be the best way of
solving all problems, yet it is a thing of no great extent; it being all
contained in the doctrine of rectangles, and rectangled solids. So that
although they come to an equation which determines the quantity sought,
yet they cannot sometimes by art exhibit that quantity in a plane, but
in some conic section; that is, as geometricians say, not geometrically,
but mechanically. Now such problems as these, they call _solid_; and
when they cannot exhibit the quantity sought for with the help of a
conic section, they call it a _lineary_ problem. And therefore in the
quantities of angles, and of the arches of circles, there is no use at
all of the analytics which proceed by the powers; so that the ancients
pronounced it impossible to exhibit in a plane the division of angles,
except bisection, and the bisection of the bisected parts, otherwise
than mechanically. For Pappus, (before the 31st proposition of his
fourth book) distinguishing and defining the several kinds of problems,
says that "some are _plane_, others _solid_, and others _lineary_.
Those, therefore, which may be solved by strait lines and the
circumferences of circles, (that is, which may be described with the
rule and compass, without any other instrument), are fitly called
_plane_; for the lines, by which such problems are found out, have their
generation in a plane. But those which are solved by the using of some
one or more conic sections in their construction, are called _solid_,
because their construction cannot be made without using the superficies
of solid figures, namely, of cones. There remains the third kind, which
is called _lineary_, because other lines besides those already mentioned
are made use of in their construction, &c." And a little after he says,
"of this kind are the _spiral_ lines, the _quadratrices_, the
_conchoeides_, and the _cissoeides_, And geometricians think it no small
fault, when for the finding out of a plane problem any man makes use of
conics, or new lines." Now he ranks the trisection of an angle among
solid problems, and the quinquesection among lineary. But what! are the
ancient geometricians to be blamed, who made use of the quadratrix for
the finding out of a strait line equal to the arch of a circle? And
Pappus himself, was he faulty, when he found out the trisection of an
angle by the help of an hyperbole? Or am I in the wrong, who think I
have found out the construction of both these problems by the rule and
compass only? Neither they, nor I. For the ancients made use of this
analysis which proceeds by the powers; and with them it was a fault to
do that by a more remote power, which might be done by a nearer; as
being an argument that they did not sufficiently understand the nature
of the thing.

The virtue of this kind of analysis consists in the changing and turning
and tossing of rectangles and analogisms; and the skill of analysts is
mere logic, by which they are able methodically to find out whatsoever
lies hid either in the subject or predicate of the conclusion sought
for. But this doth not properly belong to algebra, or the analytics
specious, symbolical, or cossick; which are, as I may say, the
_brachygraphy_ of the analytics, and an art neither of teaching nor
learning geometry, but of registering with brevity and celerity the
inventions of geometricians. For though it be easy to discourse by
symbols of very remote propositions; yet whether such discourse deserve
to be thought very profitable, when it is made without any ideas of the
things themselves, I know not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  C. XX.
  _of
  the translation_.
  _Fig. 1-2_
]

[Illustration:

  C. XX.
  _of
  the translation_.
  _Fig. 3_
]

[Illustration:

  C. XX.
  _of
  the translation_.
  _Fig. 4_
]

[Illustration:

  C. XX.
  _of
  the translation_.
  _Fig. 5-6_
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XXI.

                          OF CIRCULAR MOTION.

1. In simple motion, every strait line taken in the body moved is so
    carried, that it is always parallel to the places in which it
    formerly was.—2. If circular motion be made about a resting centre,
    and in that circle there be an epicycle, whose revolution is made
    the contrary way, in such manner that in equal times it make equal
    angles, every strait line taken in that epicycle will be so carried,
    that it will always be parallel to the places in which it formerly
    was.—3. The properties of simple motion.—4. If a fluid be moved with
    simple circular motion, all the points taken in it will describe
    their circles in times proportional to the distances from the
    centre.—5. Simple motion dissipates heterogeneous and congregates
    homogeneous bodies.—6. If a circle made by a movent moved with
    simple motion be commensurable to another circle made by a point
    which is carried about by the same movent, all the points of both
    the circles will at some time return to the same situation.—7.. If a
    sphere have simple motion, its motion will more dissipate
    heterogeneous bodies by how much it is more remote from the
    poles.—8. If the simple circular motion of a fluid body be hindered
    by a body which is not fluid, the fluid body will spread itself upon
    the superficies of that body.—9. Circular motion about a fixed
    centre casteth off by the tangent such things as lie upon the
    circumference and stick not to it.—10. Such things, as are moved
    with simple circular motion, beget simple circular motion.—11. If
    that which is so moved have one side hard and the other side fluid,
    its motion will not be perfectly circular.


[Sidenote: In simple motion, every strait line taken in the body moved
           is so carried, that it is always parallel to the places in
           which it formerly was.]

1. I have already defined _simple motion_ to be that, in which the
several points taken in a moved body do in several equal times describe
several equal arches. And therefore in simple circular motion it is
necessary that every strait line taken in the moved body be always
carried parallel to itself; which I thus demonstrate.

First, let A B (in the first figure) be any strait line taken in any
solid body; and let A D be any arch drawn upon any centre C and radius
CA. Let the point B be understood to describe towards the same parts the
arch B E, like and equal to the arch A D. Now in the same time in which
the point A transmits the arch A D, the point B, which by reason of its
simple motion is supposed to be carried with a velocity equal to that of
A, will transmit the arch B E; and at the end of the same time the whole
A B will be in D E; and therefore A B and D E are equal. And seeing the
arches A D and B E are like and equal, their subtending strait lines AD
and BE will also be equal; and therefore the four-sided figure A B D E
will be a parallelogram. Wherefore A B is carried parallel to itself.
And the same may be proved by the same method, if any other strait line
be taken in the same moved body in which the strait line A B was taken.
So that all strait lines, taken in a body moved with simple circular
motion, will be carried parallel to themselves.

Coroll. I. It is manifest that the same will also happen in any body
which hath simple motion, though not circular. For all the points of any
strait line whatsoever will describe lines, though not circular, yet
equal; so that though the crooked lines A D and B E were not arches of
circles, but of parabolas, ellipses, or of any other figures, yet both
they, and their subtenses, and the strait lines which join them, would
be equal and parallel.

Coroll. II. It is also manifest, that the radii of the equal circles A D
and B E, or the axis of a sphere, will be so carried, as to be always
parallel to the places in which they formerly were. For the strait line
B F drawn to the centre of the arch B E being equal to the radius A C,
will also be equal to the strait line F E or C D; and the angle B F E
will be equal to the angle A C D. Now the intersection of the strait
lines C A and B E being at G, the angle C G E (seeing B E and A D are
parallel) will be equal to the angle D A C. But the angle E B F is equal
to the same angle D A C; and therefore the angles C G E and E B F are
also equal. Wherefore A C and B F are parallel; which was to be
demonstrated.

[Sidenote: If circular motion be made about a resting centre, and in
           that circle there be an epicycle whose revolution is made the
           contrary way, in such manner that in equal times it make
           equal angles, every strait line taken in that epicycle will
           be so carried, that it will always be parallel to the places
           in which it formerly was.]

2. Let there be a circle given (in the second figure) whose centre is A,
and radius A B; and upon the centre B and any radius B C let the
epicycle C D E be described. Let the centre B be understood to be
carried about the centre A, and the whole epicycle with it till it be
coincident with the circle F G H, whose centre is I; and let B A I be
any angle given. But in the time that the centre B is moved to I, let
the epicycle C D E have a contrary revolution upon its own centre,
namely from E by D to C, according to the same proportions; that is, in
such manner, that in both the circles, equal angles be made in equal
times. I say E C, the axis of the epicycle, will be always carried
parallel to itself. Let the angle F I G be made equal to the angle B A
I; I F and A B will therefore be parallel; and how much the axis A G has
departed from its former place A C (the measure of which progression is
the angle C A G, or C B D, which I suppose equal to it) so much in the
same time has the axis I G, the same with B C, departed from its own
former situation. Wherefore, in what time B C comes to I G by the motion
from B to I upon the centre A, in the same time G will come to F by the
contrary motion of the epicycle; that is, it will be turned backwards to
F, and I G will lie in I F. But the angles F I G and G A C are equal;
and therefore A C, that is, B C, and I F, (that is the axis, though in
different places) will be parallel. Wherefore, the axis of the epicycle
E D C will be carried always parallel to itself; which was to be proved.

Coroll. From hence it is manifest, that those two annual motions which
Copernicus ascribes to the earth, are reducible to this one circular
simple motion, by which all the points of the moved body are carried
always with equal velocity, that is, in equal times they make equal
revolutions uniformly.

This, as it is the most simple, so it is the most frequent of all
circular motions; being the same which is used by all men when they turn
anything round with their arms, as they do in grinding or sifting. For
all the points of the thing moved describe lines which are like and
equal to one another. So that if a man had a ruler, in which many pens'
points of equal length were fastened, he might with this one motion
write many lines at once.

[Sidenote: Properties of simple motion.]

3. Having shown what simple motion is, I will here also set down some
properties of the same.

First, when a body is moved with simple motion in a fluid medium which
hath no vacuity, it changes the situation of all the parts of the fluid
ambient which resist its motion; I say there are no parts so small of
the fluid ambient, how far soever it be continued, but do change their
situation in such manner, as that they leave their places continually to
other small parts that come into the same.

For (in the same second figure) let any body, as K L M N, be understood
to be moved with simple circular motion; and let the circle, which every
point thereof describes, have any determined quantity, suppose that of
the same K L M N. Wherefore the centre A and every other point, and
consequently the moved body itself, will be carried sometimes towards
the side where is K, and sometimes towards the other side where is M.
When therefore it is carried to K, the parts of the fluid medium on that
side will go back; and, supposing all space to be full, others on the
other side will succeed. And so it will be when the body is carried to
the side M, and to N, and every way. Now when the nearest parts of the
fluid medium go back, it is necessary that the parts next to those
nearest parts go back also; and supposing still all space to be full,
other parts will come into their places with succession perpetual and
infinite. Wherefore all, even the least parts of the fluid medium,
change their places, &c. Which was to be proved.

It is evident from hence, that simple motion, whether circular or not
circular, of bodies which make perpetual returns to their former places,
hath greater or less force to dissipate the parts of resisting bodies,
as it is more or less swift, and as the lines described have greater or
less magnitude. Now the greatest velocity that can be, may be understood
to be in the least circuit, and the least in the greatest; and may be so
supposed, when there is need.

[Sidenote: If a fluid be moved with simple circular motion, all the
           points taken in it will describe their circles in times
           proportional to the distances from the centre.]

4. Secondly, supposing the same simple motion in the air, water, or
other fluid medium; the parts of the medium, which adhere to the moved
body, will be carried about with the same motion and velocity, so that
in what time soever any point of the movent finishes its circle, in the
same time every part of the medium, which adheres to the movent, shall
also describe such a part of its circle, as is equal to the whole circle
of the movent; I say, it shall describe a part, and not the whole
circle, because all its parts receive their motion from an interior
concentric movent, and of concentric circles the exterior are always
greater than the interior; nor can the motion imprinted by any movent be
of greater velocity than that of the movent itself. From whence it
follows, that the more remote parts of the fluid ambient shall finish
their circles in times, which have to one another the same proportion
with their distances from the movent. For every point of the fluid
ambient, as long as it toucheth the body which carries it about, is
carried about with it, and would make the same circle, but that it is
left behind so much as the exterior circle exceeds the interior. So that
if we suppose some thing, which is not fluid, to float in that part of
the fluid ambient which is nearest to the movent, it will together with
the movent be carried about. Now that part of the fluid ambient, which
is not the nearest but almost the nearest, receiving its degree of
velocity from the nearest, which degree cannot be greater than it was in
the giver, doth therefore in the same time make a circular line, not a
whole circle, yet equal to the whole circle of the nearest. Therefore in
the same time that the movent describes its circle, that which doth not
touch it shall not describe its circle; yet it shall describe such a
part of it, as is equal to the whole circle of the movent. And after the
same manner, the more remote parts of the ambient will describe in the
same time such parts of their circles, as shall be severally equal to
the whole circle of the movent; and, by consequent, they shall finish
their whole circles in times proportional to their distances from the
movent; which was to be proved.

[Sidenote: Simple motion dissipates heterogeneous and congregates
           homogeneous bodies.]

5. Thirdly, the same simple motion of a body placed in a fluid medium,
congregates or gathers into one place such things as naturally float in
that medium, if they be homogeneous; and if they be heterogeneous, it
separates and dissipates them. But if such things as be heterogeneous do
not float, but settle, then the same motion stirs and mingles them
disorderly together. For seeing bodies, which are unlike to one another,
that is, heterogeneous bodies, are not unlike in that they are bodies;
for bodies, as bodies, have no difference; but only from some special
cause, that is, from some internal motion, or motions of their smallest
parts (for I have shown in chap. IX, art. 9, that all mutation is such
motion), it remains that heterogeneous bodies have their unlikeness or
difference from one another from their internal or specifical motions.
Now bodies which have such difference receive unlike and different
motions from the same external common movent; and therefore they will
not be moved together, that is to say, they will be dissipated. And
being dissipated they will necessarily at some time or other meet with
bodies like themselves, and be moved alike and together with them; and
afterwards meeting with more bodies like themselves, they will unite and
become greater bodies. Wherefore homogeneous bodies are congregated, and
heterogeneous dissipated by simple motion in a medium where they
naturally float. Again, such as being in a fluid medium do not float,
but sink, if the motion of the fluid medium be strong enough, will be
stirred up and carried away by that motion, and consequently they will
be hindered from returning to that place to which they sink naturally,
and in which only they would unite, and out of which they are
promiscuously carried; that is, they are disorderly mingled.

Now this motion, by which homogeneous bodies are congregated and
heterogeneous are scattered, is that which is commonly called
_fermentation_, from the Latin _fervere_; as the Greeks have their Ζύμη,
which signifies the same, from Ζέω _ferveo_. For seething makes all the
parts of the water change their places; and the parts of any thing, that
is thrown into it, will go several ways according to their several
natures. And yet all _fervour_ or seething is not caused by fire; for
new wine and many other things have also their fermentation and fervour,
to which fire contributes little, and sometimes nothing. But when in
fermentation we find heat, it is made by the fermentation.

[Sidenote: If a circle made by a movent moved with simple motion, be
           commensurable  to another circle made by a point which is
           carried about by  the same movent, all the points of both the
           circles will at some time  return to the same situation.]

6. Fourthly, in what time soever the movent, whose centre is A (in fig.
2) moved in K L N, shall, by any number of revolutions, that is, when
the perimeters B I and K L N be commensurable, have described a line
equal to the circle which passes through the points B and I; in the same
time all the points of the floating body, whose centre is B, shall
return to have the same situation in respect of the movent, from which
they departed. For seeing it is as the distance B A, that is, as the
radius of the circle which passes through B I is to the perimeter itself
B I, so the radius of the circle K L N is to the perimeter K L N; and
seeing the velocities of the points B and K are equal, the time also of
the revolution in I B to the time of one revolution in K L N, will be as
the perimeter B I to the perimeter K L N; and therefore so many
revolutions in K L N, as together taken are equal to the perimeter B I,
will be finished in the same time in which the whole perimeter B I is
finished; and therefore also the points L, N, F and H, or any of the
rest, will in the same time return to the same situation from which they
departed; and this may be demonstrated, whatsoever be the points
considered. Wherefore all the points shall in that time return to the
same situation; which was to be proved.

From hence it follows, that if the perimeters B I and L K N be not
commensurable, then all the points will never return to have the same
situation or configuration in respect of one another.

[Sidenote: If a sphere have simple motion, its motion will more
           dissipate heterogeneous bodies by how much it is more remote
           from  the poles.]

7. In simple motion, if the body moved be of a spherical figure, it hath
less force towards its poles than towards its middle to dissipate
heterogeneous, or to congregate homogeneous bodies.

Let there be a sphere (as in the third figure) whose centre is A and
diameter B C; and let it be conceived to be moved with simple circular
motion; of which motion let the axis be the strait line D E, cutting the
diameter B C at right angles in A. Let now the circle, which is
described by any point B of the sphere, have B F for its diameter; and
taking F G equal to B C, and dividing it in the middle in H, the centre
of the sphere A will, when half a revolution is finished, lie in H. And
seeing H F and A B are equal, a circle described upon the centre H with
the radius H F or H G, will be equal to the circle whose centre is A and
radius A B. And if the same motion be continued, the point B will at the
end of another half revolution return to the place from whence it began
to be moved; and therefore at the end of half a revolution, the point B
will be carried to F, and the whole hemisphere D B E into that
hemisphere in which are the points L, K and F. Wherefore that part of
the fluid medium, which is contiguous to the point F, will in the same
time go back the length of the strait line B F; and in the return of the
point F to B, that is, of G to C, the fluid medium will go back as much
in a strait line from the point C. And this is the effect of simple
motion in the middle of the sphere, where the distance from the poles is
greatest. Let now the point I be taken in the same sphere nearer to the
pole E, and through it let the strait line I K be drawn parallel to the
strait line B F, cutting the arch F L in K, and the axis H L in M; then
connecting H K, upon H F let the perpendicular K N be drawn. In the same
time therefore that B comes to F the point I will come to K, B F and I K
being equal and described with the same velocity. Now the motion in I K
to the fluid medium upon which it works, namely, to that part of the
medium which is contiguous to the point K, is oblique, whereas if it
proceeded in the strait line H K it would be perpendicular; and
therefore the motion which proceeds in I K has less power than that
which proceeds in H K with the same velocity. But the motions in H K and
H F do equally thrust back the medium; and therefore the part of the
sphere at K moves the medium less than the part at F, namely, so much
less as K N is less than H F. Wherefore also the same motion hath less
power to disperse heterogeneous, and to congregate homogeneous bodies,
when it is nearer, than when it is more remote from the poles; which was
to be proved.

Coroll. It is also necessary, that in planes which are perpendicular to
the axis, and more remote than the pole itself from the middle of the
sphere, this simple motion have no effect. For the axis D E with simple
motion describes the superficies of a cylinder; and towards the bases of
the cylinder there is in this motion no endeavour at all.

[Sidenote: If a simple circular motion of a fluid body be hindered by  a
           body which is not fluid, the fluid body will spread itself
           upon the superficies of that body.]

8. If in a fluid medium moved about, as hath been said, with simple
motion, there be conceived to float some other spherical body which is
not fluid, the parts of the medium, which are stopped by that body, will
endeavour to spread themselves every way upon the superficies of it. And
this is manifest enough by experience, namely, by the spreading of water
poured out upon a pavement. But the reason of it may be this. Seeing the
sphere A (in fig. 3) is moved towards B, the medium also in which it is
moved will have the same motion. But because in this motion it falls
upon a body not liquid, as G, so that it cannot go on; and seeing the
small parts of the medium cannot go forwards, nor can they go directly
backwards against the force of the movent; it remains, therefore, that
they diffuse themselves upon the superficies of that body, as towards O
and P; which was to be proved.

[Sidenote: Circular motion about a fixed centre casteth off by the
           tangent  such things as lie upon the circumference & stick
           not to it.]

9. Compounded circular motion, in which all the parts of the moved body
do at once describe circumferences, some greater, others less, according
to the proportion of their several distances from the common centre,
carries about with it such bodies, as being not fluid, adhere to the
body so moved; and such as do not adhere, it casteth forwards in a
strait line which is a tangent to the point from which they are cast
off.

For let there be a circle whose radius is A B (in fig. 4); and let a
body be placed in the circumference in B, which if it be fixed there,
will necessarily be carried about with it, as is manifest of itself. But
whilst the motion proceeds, let us suppose that body to be unfixed in B.
I say, the body will continue its motion in the tangent B C. For let
both the radius A B and the sphere B be conceived to consist of hard
matter; and let us suppose the radius A B to be stricken in the point B
by some other body which falls upon it in the tangent D B. Now,
therefore, there will be a motion made by the concourse of two things,
the one, endeavour towards C in the strait line D B produced, in which
the body B would proceed, if it were not retained by the radius A B; the
other, the retention itself. But the retention alone causeth no
endeavour towards the centre; and, therefore, the retention being taken
away, which is done by the unfixing of B, there will remain but one
endeavour in B, namely, that in the tangent B C. Wherefore the motion of
the body B unfixed will proceed in the tangent B C; which was to be
proved.

By this demonstration it is manifest, that circular motion about an
unmoved axis shakes off and puts further from the centre of its motion
such things as touch, but do not stick fast to its superficies; and the
more, by how much the distance is greater from the poles of the circular
motion; and so much the more also, by how much the things, that are
shaken off, are less driven towards the centre by the fluid ambient, for
other causes.

[Sidenote: Such things as are moved with simple circular motion, beget
           simple circular motion.]

10. If in a fluid medium a spherical body be moved with simple circular
motion, and in the same medium there float another sphere whose matter
is not fluid, this sphere also shall be moved with simple circular
motion.

Let B C D (in fig. 5) be a circle, whose centre is A, and in whose
circumference there is a sphere so moved, that it describes with simple
motion the perimeter B C D. Let also E F G be another sphere of
consistent matter, whose semidiameter is E H, and centre H; and with the
radius A H let the circle H I be described. I say, the sphere E F G
will, by the motion of the body in B C D, be moved in the circumference
H I with simple motion.

For seeing the motion in B C D (by art. 4 of this chapter) makes all the
points of the fluid medium describe in the same time circular lines
equal to one another, the points E, H and G of the strait line E H G
will in the same time describe with equal radii equal circles. Let E B
be drawn equal and parallel to the strait line A H; and let A B be
connected, which will therefore be equal and parallel to E H; and
therefore also, if upon the centre B and radius B E the arch E K be
drawn equal to the arch H I, and the strait lines A I, B K and I K be
drawn, B K and A I will be equal; and they will also be parallel,
because the two arches E K and H I, that is, the two angles K B E and I
A H are equal; and, consequently, the strait lines A B and K I, which
connect them, will also be equal and parallel. Wherefore K I and E H are
parallel. Seeing, therefore, E and H are carried in the same time to K
and I, the whole strait line I K will be parallel to E H, from whence it
departed. And, therefore, seeing the sphere E F G is supposed to be of
consistent matter, so as all its points keep always the same situation,
it is necessary that every other strait line, taken in the same sphere,
be carried always parallel to the places in which it formerly was.
Wherefore the sphere E F G is moved with simple circular motion; which
was to be demonstrated.

[Sidenote: If that which is so moved have one side hard and the other
           side fluid, its motion will not be perfectly circular.]

11. If in a fluid medium, whose parts are stirred by a body moved with
simple motion, there float another body, which hath its superficies
either wholly hard, or wholly fluid, the parts of this body shall
approach the centre equally on all sides; that is to say, the motion of
the body shall be circular, and concentric with the motion of the
movent. But if it have one side hard, and the other side fluid, then
both those motions shall not have the same centre, nor shall the
floating body be moved in the circumference of a perfect circle.

Let a body be moved in the circumference of the circle K L M N (in fig
2.) whose centre is A. And let there be another body at I, whose
superficies is either all hard or all fluid. Also let the medium, in
which both these bodies are placed, be fluid. I say, the body at I will
be moved in the circle I B about the centre A. For this has been
demonstrated in the last article.

Wherefore let the superficies of the body at I be fluid on one side, and
hard on the other. And first, let the fluid side be towards the centre.
Seeing, therefore, the motion of the medium is such, as that its parts
do continually change their places, (as hath been shown in art 5); if
this change of place be considered in those parts of the medium which
are contiguous to the fluid superficies, it must needs be that the small
parts of that superficies enter into the places of the small parts of
the medium which are contiguous to them; and the like change of place
will be made with the next contiguous parts towards A. And if the fluid
parts of the body at I have any degree at all of tenacity (for there are
degrees of tenacity, as in the air and water) the whole fluid side will
be lifted up a little, but so much the less, as its parts have less
tenacity; whereas the hard part of the superficies, which is contiguous
to the fluid part, has no cause at all of elevation, that is to say, no
endeavour towards A.

Secondly, let the hard superficies of the body at I be towards A. By
reason, therefore, of the said change of place of the parts which are
contiguous to it, the hard superficies must, of necessity, seeing by
supposition there is no empty space, either come nearer to A, or else
its smallest parts must supply the contiguous places of the medium,
which otherwise would be empty. But this cannot be, by reason of the
supposed hardness; and, therefore, the other must needs be, namely, that
the body come nearer to A. Wherefore the body at I has greater endeavour
towards the centre A, when its hard side is next it, than when it is
averted from it. But the body in I, while it is moving in the
circumference of the circle I B, has sometimes one side, sometimes
another, turned towards the centre; and, therefore, it is sometimes
nearer, sometimes further off from the centre A. Wherefore the body at I
is not carried in the circumference of a perfect circle; which was to be
demonstrated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  _Vol. 1. Lat. & Eng._
  C. XXI.
  _Fig. 1-5_
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXII.

                      OF OTHER VARIETY OF MOTION.

1. Endeavour and pressure how they differ.—2. Two kinds of mediums in
    which bodies are moved.—3. Propagation of motion, what it is.—4.
    What motion bodies have, when they press one another.—5. Fluid
    bodies, when they are pressed together, penetrate one another.—6.
    When one body presseth another and doth not penetrate it, the action
    of the pressing body is perpendicular to the superficies of the body
    pressed.—7. When a hard body, pressing another body, penetrates the
    same, it doth not penetrate it perpendicularly, unless it fall
    perpendicularly upon it.—8. Motion sometimes opposite to that of the
    movent.—9. In a full medium, motion is propagated to any
    distance.—10. Dilatation and contraction what they are.—11.
    Dilatation and contraction suppose mutation of the smallest parts in
    respect of their situation.—12. All traction is pulsion.—13. Such
    things as being pressed or bent restore themselves, have motion in
    their internal parts.—14. Though that which carrieth another be
    stopped, the body carried will proceed.—15, 16. The effects of
    percussion not to be compared with those of weight.—17, 18. Motion
    cannot begin first in the internal parts of a body.—19. Action and
    reaction proceed in the same line.—20. Habit, what it is.


[Sidenote: Endeavour and pressure how they differ.]

1. I have already (chapter XV. art. 2) defined endeavour to be motion
through some length, though not considered as length, but as a point.
Whether, therefore, there be resistance or no resistance, the endeavour
will still be the same. For simply to endeavour is to go. But when two
bodies, having opposite endeavours, press one another, then the
endeavour of either of them is that which we call pressure, and is
mutual when their pressures are opposite.

[Sidenote: Two kinds of mediums in which bodies are moved.]

2. Bodies moved, and also the mediums in which they are moved, are of
two kinds. For either they have their parts coherent in such manner, as
no part of the moved body will easily yield to the movent, except the
whole body yield also, and such are the things we call _hard_: or else
their parts, while the whole remains unmoved, will easily yield to the
movent, and these we call _fluid_ or _soft_ bodies. For the words
_fluid_, _soft_, _tough_, and _hard_, in the same manner as _great_ and
_little_, are used only comparatively; and are not different kinds, but
different degrees of quality.

[Sidenote: Propagation of motion, what it is.]

3. To _do_, and to _suffer_, is to move and to be moved; and nothing is
moved but by that which toucheth it and is also moved, as has been
formerly shown. And how great soever the distance be, we say the first
movent moveth the last moved body, but mediately; namely so, as that the
first moveth the second, the second the third, and so on, till the last
of all be touched. When therefore one body, having opposite endeavour to
another body, moveth the same, and that moveth a third, and so on, I
call that action _propagation of motion_.

[Sidenote: What motion bodies have when they press one another.]

4. When two fluid bodies, which are in a free and open space, press one
another, their parts will endeavour, or be moved, towards the sides; not
only those parts which are there where the mutual contact is, but all
the other parts. For in the first contact, the parts, which are pressed
by both the endeavouring bodies, have no place either forwards or
backwards in which they can be moved; and therefore they are pressed out
towards the sides. And this expressure, when the forces are equal, is in
a line perpendicular to the bodies pressing. But whensoever the foremost
parts of both the bodies are pressed, the hindermost also must be
pressed at the same time; for the motion of the hindermost parts cannot
in an instant be stopped by the resistance of the foremost parts, but
proceeds for some time; and therefore, seeing they must have some place
in which they may be moved, and that there is no place at all for them
forwards, it is necessary that they be moved into the places which are
towards the sides every way. And this effect follows of necessity, not
only in fluid, but in consistent and hard bodies, though it be not
always manifest to sense. For though from the compression of two stones
we cannot with our eyes discern any swelling outwards towards the sides,
as we perceive in two bodies of wax; yet we know well enough by reason,
that some tumour must needs be there, though it be but little.

[Sidenote: Fluid bodies, when they are pressed together, penetrate one
           another.]

5. But when the space is enclosed, and both the bodies be fluid, they
will, if they be pressed together, penetrate one another, though
differently, according to their different endeavours. For suppose a
hollow cylinder of hard matter, well stopped at both ends, but filled
first, below with some heavy fluid body, as quicksilver, and above with
water or air. If now the bottom of the cylinder be turned upwards, the
heaviest fluid body, which is now at the top, having the greatest
endeavour downwards, and being by the hard sides of the vessel hindered
from extending itself sideways, must of necessity either be received by
the lighter body, that it may sink through it, or else it must open a
passage through itself, by which the lighter body may ascend. For of the
two bodies, that, whose parts are most easily separated, will be the
first divided; which being done, it is not necessary that the parts of
the other suffer any separation at all. And therefore when two liquors,
which are enclosed in the same vessel, change their places, there is no
need that their smallest parts should be mingled with one another; for a
way being opened through one of them, the parts of the other need not be
separated.

Now if a fluid body, which is not enclosed, press a hard body, its
endeavour will indeed be towards the internal parts of that hard body;
but being excluded by the resistance of it, the parts of the fluid body
will be moved every way according to the superficies of the hard body,
and that equally, if the pressure be perpendicular; for when all the
parts of the cause are equal, the effects will be equal also. But if the
pressure be not perpendicular, then the angles of the incidence being
unequal, the expansion also will be unequal, namely, greater on that
side where the angle is greater, because that motion is most direct
which proceeds by the directest line.

[Sidenote: When one body presseth another and doth not penetrate it, the
           action of the pressing body is perpendicular to the
           superficies of the body pressed.]

6. If a body, pressing another body, do not penetrate it, it will
nevertheless give to the part it presseth an endeavour to yield, and
recede in a strait line perpendicular to its superficies in that point
in which it is pressed.

Let A B C D (in fig. 1) be a hard body, and let another body, falling
upon it in the strait line E A, with any inclination or without
inclination, press it in the point A. I say the body so pressing, and
not penetrating it, will give to the part A an endeavour to yield or
recede in a strait line perpendicular to the line A D.

For let A B be perpendicular to A D, and let B A be produced to F. If
therefore A F be coincident with A E, it is of itself manifest that the
motion in E A will make A to endeavour in the line A B. Let now E A be
oblique to A D, and from the point E let the strait line E C be drawn,
cutting A D at right angles in D, and let the rectangles A B C D and A D
E F be completed. I have shown (in the 8th article of chapter XVI) that
the body will be carried from E to A by the concourse of two uniform
motions, the one in E F and its parallels, the other in E D and its
parallels. But the motion in E F and its parallels, whereof D A is one,
contributes nothing to the body in A to make it endeavour or press
towards B; and therefore the whole endeavour, which the body hath in the
inclined line E A to pass or press the strait line A D, it hath it all
from the perpendicular motion or endeavour in F A. Wherefore the body E,
after it is in A, will have only that perpendicular endeavour which
proceeds from the motion in F A, that is, in A B; which was to be
proved.

[Sidenote: When a hard body, pressing another body, penetrates the same,
           it doth not penetrate it perpendicularly, unless it fall
           perpendicularly upon it.]

7. If a hard body falling upon or pressing another body penetrate the
same, its endeavour after its first penetration will be neither in the
inclined line produced, nor in the perpendicular, but sometimes betwixt
both, sometimes without them.

Let E A G (in the same fig. 1) be the inclined line produced; and first,
let the passage through the medium, in which E A is, be easier than the
passage through the medium in which A G is. As soon therefore as the
body is within the medium in which is A G, it will find greater
resistance to its motion in D A and its parallels, than it did whilst it
was above A D; and therefore below A D it will proceed with slower
motion in the parallels of D A, than above it. Wherefore the motion
which is compounded of the two motions in E F and E D will be slower
below A D than above it; and therefore also, the body will not proceed
from A in E A produced, but below it. Seeing, therefore, the endeavour
in A B is generated by the endeavour in F A; if to the endeavour in F A
there be added the endeavour in D A, which is not all taken away by the
immersion of the point A into the lower medium, the body will not
proceed from A in the perpendicular A B, but beyond it; namely, in some
strait line between A B and A G, as in the line A H.

Secondly, let the passage through the medium E A be less easy than that
through A G. The motion, therefore, which is made by the concourse of
the motions in E F and F B, is slower above A D than below it; and
consequently, the endeavour will not proceed from A in E A produced, but
beyond it, as in A I. Wherefore, if a hard body falling, &c.; which was
to be proved.

This divergency of the strait line A H from the strait line A G is that
which, the writers of optics commonly called _refraction_, which, when
the passage is easier in the first than in the second medium, is made by
diverging from the line of inclination towards the perpendicular; and
contrarily, when the passage is not so easy in the first medium, by
departing further from the perpendicular.

[Sidenote: Motion sometimes opposite to that of the movent.]

8. By the 6th theorem it is manifest, that the force of the movent may
be so placed, as that the body moved by it may proceed in a way almost
directly contrary to that of the movent, as we see in the motion of
ships.

For let A B (in fig. 2) represent a ship, whose length from the prow to
the poop is A B, and let the wind lie upon it in the strait parallel
lines C B, D E and F G; and let D E and F G be cut in E and G by a
strait line drawn from B perpendicular to A B; also let B E and E G be
equal, and the angle A B C any angle how small soever. Then between B C
and B A let the strait line B I be drawn; and let the sail be conceived
to be spread in the same line B I, and the wind to fall upon it in the
points L, M and B; from which points, perpendicular to B I, let B K, M Q
and L P be drawn. Lastly, let E N and G O be drawn perpendicular to B G,
and cutting B K in H and K; and let H N and K O be made equal to one
another, and severally equal to B A. I say, the ship B A, by the wind
falling upon it in C B, D E, F G, and other lines parallel to them, will
be carried forwards almost opposite to the wind, that is to say, in a
way almost contrary to the way of the movent.

For the wind that blows in the line C B will (as hath been shown in art.
6) give to the point B an endeavour to proceed in a strait line
perpendicular to the strait line B I, that is, in the strait line B K;
and to the points M and L an endeavour to proceed in the strait lines M
Q and L P, which are parallel to B K. Let now the measure of the time be
B G, which is divided in the middle in E; and let the point B be carried
to H in the time B E. In the same time, therefore, by the wind blowing
in D M and F L, and as many other lines as may be drawn parallel to
them, the whole ship will be applied to the strait line H N. Also at the
end of the second time E G, it will be applied to the strait line K O.
Wherefore the ship will always go forward; and the angle it makes with
the wind will be equal to the angle A B C, how small soever that angle
be; and the way it makes will in every time be equal to the strait line
E H. I say, thus it would be, if the ship might be moved with as great
celerity sideways from B A towards K O, as it may be moved forwards in
the line B A. But this is impossible, by reason of the resistance made
by the great quantity of water which presseth the side, much exceeding
the resistance made by the much smaller quantity which presseth the prow
of the ship; so that the way the ship makes sideways is scarce sensible;
and, therefore, the point B will proceed almost in the very line B A,
making with the wind the angle A B C, how acute soever; that is to say,
it will proceed almost in the strait line B C, that is, in a way almost
contrary to the way of the movent; which was to be demonstrated.

But the sail in B I must be so stretched as that there be left in it no
bosom at all; for otherwise the strait lines L P, M Q and B K will not
be perpendicular to the plane of the sail, but falling below P, Q and K,
will drive the ship backwards. But by making use of a small board for a
sail, a little waggon with wheels for the ship, and of a smooth pavement
for the sea, I have by experience found this to be so true, that I could
scarce oppose the board to the wind in any obliquity, though never so
small, but the waggon was carried forwards by it.

By the same 6th theorem it may be found, how much a stroke, which falls
obliquely, is weaker than a stroke falling perpendicularly, they being
like and equal in all other respects.

Let a stroke fall upon the wall A B obliquely, as for example, in the
strait line C A (in fig. 3.) Let C E be drawn parallel to A B, and D A
perpendicular to the same A B and equal to C A; and let both the
velocity and time of the motion in C A be equal to the velocity and time
of the motion in D A. I say, the stroke in C A will be weaker than that
in D A, in the proportion of E A to D A. For producing D A howsoever to
F, the endeavour of both the strokes will (by art. 6) proceed from A in
the perpendicular A F. But the stroke in C A is made by the concourse of
two motions in C E and E A, of which that in C E contributes nothing to
the stroke in A, because C E and B A are parallels; and, therefore, the
stroke in C A is made by the motion which is in E A only. But the
velocity or force of the perpendicular stroke in E A, to the velocity or
force of the stroke in D A, is as E A to D A. Wherefore the oblique
stroke in C A is weaker than the perpendicular stroke in D A, in the
proportion of E A to D A or C A; which was to be proved.

[Sidenote: In a full medium, motion is propagated to any distance.]

9. In a full medium, all endeavour proceeds as far as the medium itself
reacheth; that is to say, if the medium be infinite, the endeavour will
proceed infinitely.

For whatsoever endeavoureth is moved, and therefore whatsoever standeth
in its way it maketh it yield, at least a little, namely, so far as the
movent itself is moved forwards. But that which yieldeth is also moved,
and consequently maketh that to yield which is in its way, and so on
successively as long as the medium is full; that is to say, infinitely,
if the full medium be infinite; which was to be proved.

Now although endeavour thus perpetually propagated do not always appear
to the senses as motion, yet it appears as action, or as the efficient
cause of some mutation. For if there be placed before our eyes some very
little object, as for example, a small grain of sand, which at a certain
distance is visible; it is manifest that it may be removed to such a
distance as not to be any longer seen, though by its action it still
work upon the organs of sight, as is manifest from that which was last
proved, that all endeavour proceeds infinitely. Let it be conceived
therefore to be removed from our eyes to any distance how great soever,
and a sufficient number of other grains of sand of the same bigness
added to it; it is evident that the aggregate of all those sands will be
visible; and though none of them can be seen when it is single and
severed from the rest, yet the whole heap or hill which they make will
manifestly appear to the sight; which would be impossible, if some
action did not proceed from each several part of the whole heap.

[Sidenote: Dilatation & contraction what they are.]

10. Between the degrees of hard and soft are those things which we call
_tough_, tough being that which may be bent without being altered from
what it was; and the bending of a line is either the adduction or
diduction of the extreme parts, that is, a motion from straitness to
crookedness, or contrarily, whilst the line remains still the same it
was; for by drawing out the extreme points of a line to their greatest
distance, the line is made strait, which otherwise is crooked. So also
the bending of a superficies is the diduction or adduction of its
extreme lines, that is, their dilatation and contraction.

[Sidenote: Dilatation & contraction suppose mutation of the smallest
           parts in respect of their situation.]

11. _Dilatation_ and _contraction_, as also all _flexion_, supposes
necessarily that the internal parts of the body bowed do either come
nearer to the external parts, or go further from them. For though
_flexion_ be considered only in the length of a body, yet when that body
is bowed, the line which is made on one side will be convex, and the
line on the other side will be concave; of which the concave, being the
interior line, will, unless something be taken from it and added to the
convex line, be the more crooked, that is, the greater of the two. But
they are equal; and, therefore, in flexion there is an accession made
from the interior to the exterior parts; and, on the contrary, in
tension, from the exterior to the interior parts. And as for those
things which do not easily suffer such transposition of their parts,
they are called brittle; and the great force they require to make them
yield, makes them also with sudden motion to leap asunder, and break in
pieces.

[Sidenote: All traction is pulsion.]

12. Also motion is distinguished into _pulsion_ and _traction_. And
pulsion, as I have already defined it, is when that which is moved goes
before that which moveth it. But contrarily, in traction the movent goes
before that which is moved. Nevertheless, considering it with greater
attention, it seemeth to be the same with pulsion. For of two parts of a
hard body, when that which is foremost drives before it the medium in
which the motion is made, at the same time that which is thrust forwards
thrusteth the next, and this again the next, and so on successively. In
which action, if we suppose that there is no place void, it must needs
be, that by continual pulsion, namely, when that action has gone round,
the movent will be behind that part, which at the first seemed not to be
thrust forwards, but to be drawn; so that now the body, which was drawn,
goes before the body which gives it motion; and its motion is no longer
traction, but pulsion.

[Sidenote: Such things as being pressed or bent restore themselves, have
           motion in their internal parts.]

13. Such things as are removed from their places by forcible compression
or extension, and, as soon as the force is taken away, do presently
return and restore themselves to their former situation, have the
beginning of their restitution within themselves, namely, a certain
motion in their internal parts, which was there, when, before the taking
away of the force, they were compressed, or extended. For that
restitution is motion, and that which is at rest cannot be moved, but by
a moved and a contiguous movent. Nor doth the cause of their restitution
proceed from the taking away of the force by which they were compressed
or extended; for the removing of impediments hath not the efficacy of a
cause, as has been shown at the end of the 3rd article of chap. XV. The
cause therefore of their restitution is some motion either of the parts
of the ambient, or of the parts of the body compressed or extended. But
the parts of the ambient have no endeavour which contributes to their
compression or extension, nor to the setting of them at liberty, or
restitution. It remains therefore that from the time of their
compression or extension there be left some endeavour or motion, by
which, the impediment being removed, every part resumes its former
place; that is to say, the whole restores itself.

[Sidenote: Though that which carrieth another be stopped, the body
           carried will proceed.]

14. In the carriage of bodies, if that body, which carries another, hit
upon any obstacle, or be by any means suddenly stopped, and that which
is carried be not stopped, it will go on, till its motion be by some
external impediment taken away.

For I have demonstrated (chap. VIII, art. 19) that motion, unless it be
hindered by some external resistance, will be continued eternally with
the same celerity; and in the 7th article of chap. IX, that the action
of an external agent is of no effect without contact. When therefore
that, which carrieth another thing, is stopped, that stop doth not
presently take away the motion of that which is carried. It will
therefore proceed, till its motion be by little and little extinguished
by some external resistance: which was to be proved; though experience
alone had been sufficient to prove this.

In like manner, if that body which carrieth another be put from rest
into sudden motion, that which is carried will not be moved forwards
together with it, but will be left behind. For the contiguous part of
the body carried hath almost the same motion with the body which carries
it; and the remote parts will receive different velocities according to
their different distances from the body that carries them; namely, the
more remote the parts are, the less will be their degrees of velocity.
It is necessary, therefore, that the body, which is carried, be left
accordingly more or less behind. And this also is manifest by
experience, when at the starting forward of the horse the rider falleth
backwards.

[Sidenote: The effects of percussion not to be compared with those of
           weight.]

15. In _percussion_, therefore, when one hard body is in some small part
of it stricken by another with great force, it is not necessary that the
whole body should yield to the stroke with the same celerity with which
the stricken part yields. For the rest of the parts receive their motion
from the motion of the part stricken and yielding, which motion is less
propagated every way towards the sides, than it is directly forwards.
And hence it is, that sometimes very hard bodies, which being erected
can hardly be made to stand, are more easily broken than thrown down by
a violent stroke; when, nevertheless, if all their parts together were
by any weak motion thrust forwards, they would easily be cast down.

16. Though the difference between _trusion_ and _percussion_ consist
only in this, that in trusion the motion both of the movent and moved
body begin both together in their very contact; and in percussion the
striking body is first moved, and afterwards the body stricken; yet
their effects are so different, that it seems scarce possible to compare
their forces with one another. I say, any effect of percussion being
propounded, as for example, the stroke of a beetle of any weight
assigned, by which a pile of any given length is to be driven into earth
of any tenacity given, it seems to me very hard, if not impossible, to
define with what weight, or with what stroke, and in what time, the same
pile may be driven to a depth assigned into the same earth. The cause of
which difficulty is this, that the velocity of the percutient is to be
compared with the magnitude of the ponderant. Now velocity, seeing it is
computed by the length of space transmitted, is to be accounted but as
one dimension; but weight is as a solid thing, being measured by the
dimension of the whole body. And there is no comparison to be made of a
solid body with a length, that is, with a line.

[Sidenote: Motion cannot begin first in the internal parts of a body.]

17. If the internal parts of a body be at rest, or retain the same
situation with one another for any time how little soever, there cannot
in those parts be generated any new motion or endeavour, whereof the
efficient cause is not without the body of which they are parts. For if
any small part, which is comprehended within the superficies of the
whole body, be supposed to be now at rest, and by and by to be moved,
that part must of necessity receive its motion from some moved and
contiguous body. But by supposition, there is no such moved and
contiguous part within the body. Wherefore, if there be any endeavour or
motion or change of situation in the internal parts of that body, it
must needs arise from some efficient cause that is without the body
which contains them; which was to be proved.

18. In hard bodies, therefore, which are compressed or extended, if,
that which compresseth or extendeth them being taken away, they restore
themselves to their former place or situation, it must needs be that
that endeavour or motion of their internal parts, by which they were
able to recover their former places or situations, was not extinguished
when the force by which they were compressed or extended was taken away.
Therefore, when the lath of a cross-bow bent doth, as soon as it is at
liberty, restore itself, though to him, that judges by sense, both it
and all its parts seem to be at rest; yet he, that judging by reason
doth not account the taking away of impediment for an efficient cause,
nor conceives that without an efficient cause any thing can pass from
rest to motion, will conclude that the parts were already in motion
before they began to restore themselves.

[Sidenote: Action and reaction proceed in the same line.]

19. _Action_ and _reaction_ proceed in the same line, but from opposite
terms. For seeing reaction is nothing but endeavour in the patient to
restore itself to that situation from which it was forced by the agent;
the endeavour or motion both of the agent and patient or reagent will be
propagated between the same terms; yet so, as that in action the term,
_from which_, is in reaction the term _to which_. And seeing all action
proceeds in this manner, not only between the opposite terms of the
whole line in which it is propagated, but also in all the parts of that
line, the terms _from which_ and _to which_, both of the action and
reaction, will be in the same line. Wherefore action and reaction
proceed in the same line, &c.

[Sidenote: Habit, what it is.]

20. To what has been said of motion, I will add what I have to say
concerning habit. _Habit_, therefore, is a generation of motion, not of
motion simply, but an easy conducting of the moved body in a certain and
designed way. And seeing it is attained by the weakening of such
endeavours as divert its motion, therefore such endeavours are to be
weakened by little and little. But this cannot be done but by the long
continuance of action, or by actions often repeated; and therefore
custom begets that facility, which is commonly and rightly called
_habit_; and it may be defined thus: HABIT _is motion made more easy and
ready by custom; that is to say, by perpetual endeavour, or by iterated
endeavours in a way differing from that in which the motion proceeded
from the beginning, and opposing such endeavours as resist_. And to make
this more perspicuous by example, we may observe, that when one that has
no skill in music first puts his hand to an instrument, he cannot after
the first stroke carry his hand to the place where he would make the
second stroke, without taking it back by a new endeavour, and, as it
were beginning again, pass from the first to the second. Nor will he be
able to go on to the third place without another new endeavour; but he
will be forced to draw back his hand again, and so successively, by
renewing his endeavour at every stroke; till at the last, by doing this
often, and by compounding many interrupted motions or endeavours into
one equal endeavour, he be able to make his hand go readily on from
stroke to stroke in that order and way which was at the first designed.
Nor are habits to be observed in living creatures only, but also in
bodies inanimate. For we find that when the lath of a cross-bow is
strongly bent, and would if the impediment were removed return again
with great force; if it remain a long time bent, it will get such a
habit, that when it is loosed and left to its own freedom, it will not
only not restore itself, but will require as much force for the bringing
of it back to its first posture, as it did for the bending of it at the
first.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  _Vol. 1. Lat. & Eng._
  C. XXII.
  _Fig. 1-3_
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                -------


                              CHAP. XXIII.

                  OF THE CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION; OF
                  BODIES PRESSING DOWNWARDS IN STRAIT
                            PARALLEL LINES.

1. Definitions and suppositions.—2. Two planes of equiponderation are
    not parallel.—3. The centre of equiponderation is in every plane of
    equiponderation.—4. The moments of equal ponderants are to one
    another as their distances from the centre of the scale.—5, 6. The
    moments of unequal ponderants have their proportion to one another
    compounded of the proportions of their weights and distances from
    the centre of the scale.—7. If two ponderants have their weights and
    distances from the centre of the scale in reciprocal proportion,
    they are equally poised; and contrarily.—8. If the parts of any
    ponderant press the beams of the scale every where equally, all the
    parts cut off, reckoned from the centre of the scale, will have
    their moments in the same proportion with that of the parts of a
    triangle cut off from the vertex by strait lines parallel to the
    base.—9. The diameter of equiponderation of figures, which are
    deficient according to commensurable proportions of their altitudes
    and bases, divides the axis, so that the part taken next the vertex
    is to the other part of the complete figure to the deficient
    figure.—10. The diameter of equiponderation of the complement of the
    half of any of the said deficient figures, divides that line which
    is drawn through the vertex parallel to the base, so that the part
    next the vertex is to the other part as the complete figure to the
    complement.—11. The centre of equiponderation of the half of any of
    the deficient figures in the first row of the table of art. 3, chap.
    XVII, may be found out by the numbers of the second row.—12. The
    centre of equiponderation of the half of any of the figures of the
    second row of the same table, may be found out by the numbers of the
    fourth row.—13. The centre of equiponderation of the half of any of
    the figures in the same table being known, the centre of the excess
    of the same figure above a triangle of the same altitude and base is
    also known.—14. The centre of equiponderation of a solid sector is
    in the axis so divided, that the part next the vertex be to the
    whole axis, wanting half the axis of the portion of the sphere, as 3
    to 4.

                              DEFINITIONS.

[Sidenote: Definitions.]

I. A _scale_ is a strait line, whose middle point is immovable, all the
rest of its points being at liberty; and that part of the scale, which
reaches from the centre to either of the weights, is called the _beam_.

II. _Equiponderation_ is when the endeavour of one body, which presses
one of the beams, resists the endeavour of another body pressing the
other beam, so that neither of them is moved; and the bodies, when
neither of them is moved, are said to be _equally poised_.

III. _Weight_ is the aggregate of all the endeavours, by which all the
points of that body, which presses the beam, tend downwards in lines
parallel to one another; and the body which presses is called the
_ponderant_.

IV. _Moment_ is the power which the ponderant has to move the beam, by
reason of a determined situation.

V. _The plane of equiponderation_ is that by which the ponderant is so
divided, that the moments on both sides remain equal.

VI. _The diameter of equiponderation_ is the common section of the two
planes of equiponderation, and is in the strait line by which the weight
is hanged.

VII. _The centre of equiponderation_ is the common point of the two
diameters of equiponderation.

                             SUPPOSITIONS.

[Sidenote: Suppositions.]

I. When two bodies are equally poised, if weight be added to one of them
and not to the other, their equiponderation ceases.

II. When two ponderants of equal magnitude, and of the same species or
matter, press the beam on both sides at equal distances from the centre
of the scale, their moments are equal. Also when two bodies endeavour at
equal distances from the centre of the scale, if they be of equal
magnitude and of the same species, their moments are equal.

[Sidenote: Two planes
           of equiponderation
           are
           not parallel.]

2. No two planes of equiponderation are parallel.

Let A B C D (in fig. 1) be any ponderant whatsoever; and in it let E F
be a plane of equiponderation; parallel to which, let any other plane be
drawn, as G H. I say, G H is not a plane of equiponderation. For seeing
the parts A E F D and E B C F of the ponderant A B C D are equally
poised; and the weight E G H F is added to the part A E F D, and nothing
is added to the part E B C F, but the weight E G H F is taken from it;
therefore, by the first supposition, the parts A G H D and G B C H will
not be equally poised; and consequently G H is not a plane of
equiponderation. Wherefore, no two planes of equiponderation are
parallel; which was to be proved.

[Sidenote: The centre of equiponderation is in every plane of
           equiponderation.]

3. The centre of equiponderation is in every plane of equiponderation.

For if another plane of equiponderation be taken, it will not, by the
last article, be parallel to the former plane; and therefore both those
planes will cut one another. Now that section (by the 6th definition) is
the diameter of equiponderation. Again, if another diameter of
equiponderation be taken, it will cut that former diameter; and in that
section (by the 7th definition) is the centre of equiponderation.
Wherefore the centre of equiponderation is in that diameter which lies
in the said plane of equiponderation.

[Sidenote: The moments
           of equal ponderants
           are to one
           another as their
           distances from
           the centre of
           the scale.]

4. The moment of any ponderant applied to one point of the beam, to the
moment of the same or an equal ponderant applied to any other point of
the beam, is as the distance of the former point from the centre of the
scale, to the distance of the latter point from the same centre. Or
thus, those moments are to one another, as the arches of circles which
are made upon the centre of the scale through those points, in the same
time. Or lastly thus, they are as the parallel bases of two triangles,
which have a common angle at the centre of the scale.

Let A (in fig. 2) be the centre of the scale; and let the equal
ponderants D and E press the beam A B in the points B and C; also let
the strait lines B D and C E be diameters of equiponderation; and the
points D and E in the ponderants D and E be their centres of
equiponderation. Let A G F be drawn howsoever, cutting D B produced in
F, and E C in G; and lastly, upon the common centre A, let the two
arches B H and C I be described, cutting A G F in H and I. I say, the
moment of the ponderant D to the moment of the ponderant E is as A B to
A C, or as B H to C I, or as B F to C G. For the effect of the ponderant
D, in the point B, is circular motion in the arch B H; and the effect of
the ponderant E, in the point C, circular motion in the arch C I; and by
reason of the equality of the ponderants D and E, these motions are to
one another as the quicknesses or velocities with which the points B and
C describe the arches B H and C I, that is, as the arches themselves B H
and C I, or as the strait parallels B F and C G, or as the parts of the
beam A B and A C; for A B. A C:: B F. C G:: B H. C I. are proportionals;
and therefore the effects, that is, by the 4th definition, the moments
of the equal ponderants applied to several points of the beam, are to
one another as A B and A C; or as the distances of those points from the
centre of the scale; or as the parallel bases of the triangles which
have a common angle at A; or as the concentric arches B H and C I; which
was to be demonstrated.

[Sidenote: The moments of unequal ponderants have their proportion to
           one another compounded of the proportions of their weights
           and distances from the centre of the scale.]

5. Unequal ponderants, when they are applied to several points of the
beam, and hang at liberty, that is, so as the line by which they hang be
the diameter of equiponderation, whatsoever be the figure of the
ponderant, have their moments to one another in proportion compounded of
the proportions of their distances from the centre of the scale, and of
their weights.

Let A (in fig. 3) be the centre of the scale, and A B the beam; to which
let the two ponderants C and D be applied at the points B and E. I say,
the proportion of the moment of the ponderant C to the moment of the
ponderant D, is compounded of the proportions of A B to A E, and of the
weight C to the weight D; or, if C and D be of the same species, of the
magnitude C to the magnitude D.

Let either of them, as C, be supposed to be bigger than the other, D.
If, therefore, by the addition of F, F and D together be as one body
equal to C, the moment of C to the moment of F + D will be (by the last
article) as B G is to E H. Now as F + D is to D, so let E H be to
another E I; and the moment of F + D, that is of C, to the moment of D,
will be as B G to E I. But the proportion of B G to E I is compounded of
the proportions of B G to E H, that is, of A B to A E, and of E H to E
I, that is, of the weight C to the weight D. Wherefore unequal
ponderants, when they are applied, &c. Which was to be proved.

6. The same figure remaining, if I K be drawn parallel to the beam A B,
and cutting A G in K; and K L be drawn parallel to B G, cutting A B in
L, the distances A B and A L from the centre will be proportional to the
moments of C and D. For the moment of C is B G, and the moment of D is E
I, to which K L is equal. But as the distance A B from the centre is to
the distance A L from the centre, so is B G, the moment of the ponderant
C, to L K, or E I the moment of the ponderant D.

[Sidenote: If two ponderants have their weights and distances from the
           centre of the scale in reciprocal proportion, they are
           equally poised; and contrarily.]

7. If two ponderants have their weights and distances from the centre in
reciprocal proportion, and the centre of the scale be between the points
to which the ponderants are applied, they will be equally poised. And
contrarily, if they be equally poised, their weights and distances from
the centre of the scale will be in reciprocal proportion.

Let the centre of the scale (in the same third figure) be A, the beam A
B; and let any ponderant C, having B G for its moment, be applied to the
point B; also let any other ponderant D, whose moment is E I, be applied
to the point E. Through the point I let I K be drawn parallel to the
beam A B, cutting A G in K; also let K L be drawn parallel to B G, K L
will then be the moment of the ponderant D; and by the last article, it
will be as B G, the moment of the ponderant C in the point B, to L K the
moment of the ponderant D in the point E, so A B to A L. On the other
side of the centre of the scale, let A N be taken equal to A L; and to
the point N let there be applied the ponderant O, having to the
ponderant C the proportion of A B to A N. I say, the ponderants in B and
N will be equally poised. For the proportion of the moment of the
ponderant O, in the point N, to the moment of the ponderant C in the
point B, is by the 5th article, compounded of the proportions of the
weight O to the weight C, and of the distance from the centre of the
scale A N or A L to the distance from the centre of the scale A B. But
seeing we have supposed, that the distance A B to the distance A N is in
reciprocal proportion of the weight O to the weight C, the proportion of
the moment of the ponderant O, in the point N, to the moment of the
ponderant C, in the point B, will be compounded of the proportions of A
B to A N, and of A N to A B. Wherefore, setting in order A B, A N, A B,
the moment of O to the moment of C will be as the first to the last,
that is, as A B to A B. Their moments therefore are equal; and
consequently the plane which passes through A will (by the fifth
definition) be a plane of equiponderation. Wherefore they will be
equally poised; as was to be proved.

Now the converse of this is manifest. For if there be equiponderation
and the proportion of the weights and distances be not reciprocal, then
both the weights will always have the same moments, although one of them
have more weight added to it or its distance changed.

Coroll. When ponderants are of the same species, and their moments be
equal; their magnitudes and distances from the centre of the scale will
be reciprocally proportional. For in homogeneous bodies, it is as weight
to weight, so magnitude to magnitude.

[Sidenote: If the parts of any ponderant press the beams of the scale
           every where equally, all the parts cut off, reckoned from
           centre of the scale, will have their moments in the same
           proportion with that of the parts of a triangle cut off from
           the vertex by strait lines parallel to the base.]

8. If to the whole length of the beam there be applied a parallelogram,
or a parallelopipedum, or a prisma, or a cylinder, or the superficies of
a cylinder, or of a sphere, or of any portion of a sphere or prisma; the
parts of any of them cut off with planes parallel to the base will have
their moments in the same proportion with the parts of a triangle, which
has its vertex in the centre of the scale, and for one of its sides the
beam itself, which parts are cut off by planes parallel to the base.

First, let the rectangled parallelogram A B C D (in figure 4) be applied
to the whole length of the beam A B; and producing C B howsoever to E,
let the triangle A B E be described. Let now any part of the
parallelogram, as A F, be cut off by the plane F G, parallel to the base
C B; and let F G be produced to A E in the point H. I say, the moment of
the whole A B C D to the moment of its part A F, is as the triangle A B
E to the triangle A G H, that is, in proportion duplicate to that of the
distances from the centre of the scale.

For, the parallelogram A B C D being divided into equal parts, infinite
in number, by strait lines drawn parallel to the base; and supposing the
moment of the strait line C B to be B E, the moment of the strait line F
G will (by the 7th article) be G H; and the moments of all the strait
lines of that parallelogram will be so many strait lines in the triangle
A B E drawn parallel to the base B E; all which parallels together taken
are the moment of the whole parallelogram A B C D; and the same
parallels do also constitute the superficies of the triangle A B E.
Wherefore the moment of the parallelogram A B C D is the triangle A B E;
and for the same reason, the moment of the parallelogram A F is the
triangle A G H; and therefore the moment of the whole parallelogram to
the moment of a parallelogram which is part of the same, is as the
triangle A B E to the triangle A G H, or in proportion duplicate to that
of the beams to which they are applied. And what is here demonstrated in
the case of a parallelogram may be understood to serve for that of a
cylinder, and of a prisma, and their superficies; as also for the
superficies of a sphere, of an hemisphere, or any portion of a sphere.
For the parts of the superficies of a sphere have the same proportion
with that of the parts of the axis cut off by the same parallels, by
which the parts of the superficies are cut off, as Archimedes has
demonstrated; and therefore when the parts of any of these figures are
equal and at equal distances from the centre of the scale, their moments
also are equal, in the same manner as they are in parallelograms.

Secondly, let the parallelogram A K I B not be rectangled; the strait
line I B will nevertheless press the point B perpendicularly in the
strait line B E; and the strait line L G will press the point G
perpendicularly in the strait line G H; and all the rest of the strait
lines which are parallel to I B will do the like. Whatsoever therefore
the moment be which is assigned to the strait line I B, as here, for
example, it is supposed to be B E, if A E be drawn, the moment of the
whole parallelogram A I will be the triangle A B E; and the moment of
the part A L will be the triangle A G H. Wherefore the moment of any
ponderant, which has its sides equally applied to the beam, whether they
be applied perpendicularly or obliquely, will be always to the moment of
a part of the same in such proportion as the whole triangle has to a
part of the same cut off by a plane which is parallel to the base.

[Sidenote: The diameter of equiponderation of figures which are
           deficient according to commensurable proportions of their
           altitudes and bases, divides the axis, so that the part taken
           next the vertex is to the other part as the complete figure
           to the deficient figure.]

9. The centre of equiponderation of any figure, which is deficient
according to commensurable proportions of the altitude and base
diminished, and whose complete figure is either a parallelogram or a
cylinder, or a parallelopipedum, divides the axis, so, that the part
next the vertex, to the other part, is as the complete figure to the
deficient figure.

For let C I A P E (in fig. 5) be a deficient figure, whose axis is A B,
and whose complete figure is C D F E; and let the axis A B be so divided
in Z, that A Z be to Z B as C D F E is to C I A P E. I say, the centre
of equiponderation of the figure C I A P E will be in the point Z.

First, that the centre of equiponderation of the figure C I A P E is
somewhere in the axis A B is manifest of itself; and therefore A B is a
diameter of equiponderation. Let A E be drawn, and let B E be put for
the moment of the strait line C E; the triangle A B E will therefore (by
the third article) be the moment of the complete figure C D F E. Let the
axis A B be equally divided in L, and let G L H be drawn parallel and
equal to the strait line C E, cutting the crooked line C I A P E in I
and P, and the strait lines A C and A E in K and M. Moreover, let Z O be
drawn parallel to the same C E; and let it be, as L G to L I, so L M to
another, L N; and let the same be done in all the rest of the strait
lines possible, parallel to the base; and through all the points N, let
the line A N E be drawn; the three-sided figure A N E B will therefore
be the moment of the figure C I A P E. Now the triangle A B E is (by the
9th article of chapter XVII) to the three-sided figure A N E B, as A B C
D + A I C B is to A I C B twice taken, that is, as C D F E + C I A P E
is to C I A P E twice taken. But as C I A P E is to C D F E, that is, as
the weight of the deficient figure is to the weight of the complete
figure, so is C I A P E twice taken to C D F E twice taken. Wherefore,
setting in order C D F E + C I A P E. 2 C I A P E. 2 C D F E; the
proportion of C D F E + C I A P E to C D F E twice taken will be
compounded of the proportion of C D F E + C I A P E to C I A P E twice
taken, that is, of the proportion of the triangle A B E to the
three-sided figure A N E B, that is, of the moment of the complete
figure to the moment of the deficient figure, and of the proportion of C
I A P E twice taken to C D F E twice taken, that is, to the proportion
reciprocally taken of the weight of the deficient figure to the weight
of the complete figure.

Again, seeing by supposition A Z. Z B:: C D F E. C I A P E are
proportionals; A B. A Z:: C D F E + C I A P E. C D F E will also, by
compounding, be proportionals. And seeing A L is the half of A B, A L. A
Z:: C D F E + C I A P E. 2 C D F E will also be proportionals. But the
proportion of C D F E + C I A P E to 2 C D F E is compounded, as was but
now shown, of the proportions of moment to moment, &c., and therefore
the proportion of A L to A Z is compounded of the proportion of the
moment of the complete figure C D F E to the moment of the deficient
figure C I A P E, and of the proportion of the weight of the deficient
figure C I A P E to the weight of the complete figure C D F E; but the
proportion of A L to A Z is compounded of the proportions of A L to B Z
and of B Z to A Z. Now the proportion of B Z to A Z is the proportion of
the weights reciprocally taken, that is to say, of the weight C I A P E
to the weight C D F E. Therefore the remaining proportion of A L to B Z,
that is, of L B to B Z, is the proportion of the moment of the weight C
D F E to the moment of the weight C I A P E. But the proportion of A L
to B Z is compounded of the proportions of A L to A Z and of A Z to Z B;
of which proportions that of A Z to Z B is the proportion of the weight
C D F E to the weight C I A P E. Wherefore (by art. 5 of this chapter)
the remaining proportion of A L to A Z is the proportion of the
distances of the points Z and L from the centre of the scale, which is
A. And, therefore, (by art. 6) the weight C I A P E shall hang from O in
the strait line O Z. So that O Z is one diameter of equiponderation of
the weight C I A P E. But the strait line A B is the other diameter of
equiponderation of the same weight C I A P E. Wherefore (by the 7th
definition) the point Z is the centre of the same equiponderation; which
point, by construction, divides the axis so, that the part A Z, which is
the part next the vertex, is to the other part Z B, as the complete
figure C D F E is to the deficient figure C I A P E; which is that which
was to be demonstrated.

Coroll. I. The centre of equiponderation of any of those plane
three-sided figures, which are compared with their complete figures in
the table of art. 3, chap. XVII, is to be found in the same table, by
taking the denominator of the fraction for the part of the axis cut off
next the vertex, and the numerator for the other part next the base. For
example, if it be required to find the centre of equiponderation of the
second three-sided figure of four means, there is in the concourse of
the second column with the row of three-sided figures of four means this
fraction 5⁄7, which signifies that that figure is to its parallelogram
or complete figure as 5⁄7 to unity, that is, as 5⁄7 to 7⁄7, or as 5 to
7; and, therefore the centre of equiponderation of that figure divides
the axis, so that the part next the vertex is to the other part as 7 to
5.

Coroll. II. The centre of equiponderation of any of the solids of those
figures, which are contained in the table of art. 7 of the same chap.
XVII, is exhibited in the same table. For example, if the centre of
equiponderation of a cone be sought for, the cone will be found to be
1⁄3 of its cylinder; and, therefore, the centre of its equiponderation
will so divide the axis, that the part next the vertex to the other part
will be as 3 to 1. Also the solid of a three-sided figure of one mean,
that is, a parabolical solid, seeing it is 2⁄4, that is ½ of its
cylinder, will have its centre of equiponderation in that point, which
divides the axis, so that the part towards the vertex be double to the
part towards the base.

[Sidenote: The diameter of equiponderation of the complement of the half
           of any of the said deficient figures, divides that line which
           is drawn through the vertex parallel to the base, so that the
           part next the vertex is to the other part as the complete
           figure to the complement.]

10. The diameter of equiponderation of the complement of the half of any
of those figures which are contained in the table of art. 3, chap. XVII,
divides that line which is drawn through the vertex parallel and equal
to the base, so that the part next the vertex will be to the other part,
as the complete figure to the complement.

For let A I C B (in the same fig. 5) be the half of a parabola, or of
any other of those three-sided figures which are in the table of art. 3,
chap. XVII, whose axis is A B, and base B C, having A D drawn from the
vertex, equal and parallel to the base B C, and whose complete figure is
the parallelogram A B C D. Let I Q be drawn at any distance from the
side C D, but parallel to it; and let A D be the altitude of the
complement A I C D, and Q I a line ordinately applied in it. Wherefore
the altitude A L in the deficient figure A I C B is equal to Q I the
line ordinately applied in its complement; and contrarily, L I the line
ordinately applied in the figure A I C B is equal to the altitude A Q in
its complement; and so in all the rest of the ordinate lines and
altitudes the mutation is such, that that line, which is ordinately
applied in the figure, is the altitude of its complement. And,
therefore, the proportion of the altitudes decreasing to that of the
ordinate lines decreasing, being multiplicate according to any number in
the deficient figure, is submultiplicate according to the same number in
its complement. For example, if A I C B be a parabola, seeing the
proportion of A B to A L is duplicate to that of B C to L I, the
proportion of AD to A Q in the complement A I C D, which is the same
with that of B C to L I, will be subduplicate to that of C D to Q I,
which is the same with that of A B to A L; and consequently, in a
parabola, the complement will be to the parallelogram as 1 to 3; in a
three-sided figure of two means, as 1 to 4; in a three-sided figure of
three means, as 1 to 5, &c. But all the ordinate lines together in A I C
D are its moment; and all the ordinate lines in A I C B are its moment.
Wherefore the moments of the complements of the halves of deficient
figures in the table of art. 3 of chap. XVII, being compared, are as the
deficient figures themselves; and, therefore, the diameter of
equiponderation will divide the strait line A D in such proportion, that
the part next the vertex be to the other part, as the complete figure A
B C D is to the complement A I C D.

Coroll. The diameter of equiponderation of these halves may be found by
the table of art. 3 of chap. XVII, in this manner. Let there be
propounded any deficient figure, namely, the second three-sided figure
of two means. This figure is to the complete figure as 3⁄5 to 1, that is
3 to 5. Wherefore the complement to the same complete figure is as 2 to
5; and, therefore, the diameter of equiponderation of this complement
will cut the strait line drawn from the vertex parallel to the base, so
that the part next the vertex will be to the other part as 5 to 2. And,
in like manner, any other of the said three-sided figures being
propounded, if the numerator of its fraction found out in the table be
taken from the denominator, the strait line drawn from the vertex is to
be divided, so that the part next the vertex be to the other part, as
the denominator is to the remainder which that subtraction leaves.

[Sidenote: The centre of equiponderation of the half of any of the
           deficient figures in the first row of the table of art. 3,
           chapter xvii, may be found out by the numbers of the second
           row.]

11. The centre of equiponderation of the half of any of those
crooked-lined figures, which are in the first row of the table of art. 3
of chap. XVII, is in that strait line which, being parallel to the axis,
divides the base according to the numbers of the fraction next below it
in the second row, so that the numerator be answerable to that part
which is towards the axis.

For example, let the first figure of three means be taken, whose half is
A B C D (in fig. 6), and let the rectangle A B E D be completed. The
complement therefore will be B C D E. And seeing A B E D is to the
figure A B C D (by the table) as 5 to 4, the same A B E D will be to the
complement B C D E as 5 to 1. Wherefore, if F G be drawn parallel to the
base D A, cutting the axis so that A G be to G B as 4 to 5, the centre
of equiponderation of the figure A B C D will, by the precedent article,
be somewhere in the same F G. Again, seeing, by the same article, the
complete figure A B E D, is to the complement B C D E as 5 to 1,
therefore if B E and A D be divided in I and H as 5 to 1 the centre of
equiponderation of the complement B C D E will be somewhere in the
strait line which connects H and I. Let now the strait line L K be drawn
through M the centre of the complete figure, parallel to the base; and
the strait line N O through the same centre M, perpendicular to it; and
let the strait lines L K and F G cut the strait line H I in P and Q. Let
P R be taken quadruple to P Q; and let R M be drawn and produced to F G
in S. R M therefore will be to M S as 4 to 1, that is, as the figure A B
C D to its complement B C D E. Wherefore, seeing M is the centre of the
complete figure A B E D, and the distances of R and S from the centre M
be in proportion reciprocal to that of the weight of the complement B C
D E to the weight of the figure A B C D, R and S will either be the
centres of equiponderation of their own figures, or those centres will
be in some other points of the diameters of equiponderation H I and F G.
But this last is impossible. For no other strait line can be drawn
through the point M terminating in the strait lines H I and F G, and
retaining the proportion of M R to M S, that is, of the figure A B C D
to its complement B C D E. The centre, therefore, of equiponderation of
the figure A B C D is in the point S. Now, seeing P M hath the same
proportion to Q S which R P hath to R Q, Q S will be 5 of those parts of
which P M is four, that is, of which I N is four. But I N or P M is 2 of
those parts of which E B or F G is 6; and, therefore, if it be as 4 to
5, so 2 to a fourth, that fourth will be 2½. Wherefore Q S is 2½ of
those parts of which F G is 6. But F Q is 1; and, therefore, F S is 3½.
Wherefore the remaining part G S is 2½. So that F G is so divided in S,
that the part towards the axis is in proportion to the other part, as 2½
to 3½, that is as 5 to 7; which answereth to the fraction 5⁄7 in the
second row, next under the fraction 4⁄5 in the first row. Wherefore
drawing S T parallel to the axis, the base will be divided in like
manner.

By this method it is manifest, that the base of a semiparabola will be
divided into 3 and 5; and the base of the first three-sided figure of
two means, into 4 and 6; and of the first three-sided figure of four
means, into 6 and 8. The fractions, therefore, of the second row denote
the proportions, into which the bases of the figures of the first row
are divided by the diameters of equiponderation. But the first row
begins one place higher than the second row.

[Sidenote: The centre of equiponderation of the half of any of the
           figures of the second row of the same table may be found out
           by the numbers of the fourth row.]

12. The centre of equiponderation of the half of any of the figures in
the second row of the same table of art. 3, chap. XVII, is in a strait
line parallel to the axis, and dividing the base according to the
numbers of the fraction in the fourth row, two places lower, so as that
the numerator be answerable to that part which is next the axis.

Let the half of the second three-sided figure of two means be taken; and
let it be A B C D (in fig. 7); whose complement is B C D E, and the
rectangle completed A B E D. Let this rectangle be divided by the two
strait lines L K and N O, cutting one another in the centre M at right
angles; and because A B E D is to A B C D as 5 to 3, let A B be divided
in G, so that A G to B G be as 3 to 5; and let F G be drawn parallel to
the base. Also because A B E D is (by art. 9) to B C D E as 5 to 2, let
B E be divided in the point I, so that B I be to I E as 5 to 2; and let
I H be drawn parallel to the axis, cutting L K and F G in P and Q. Let
now P R be so taken, that it be to P Q as 3 to 2, and let R M be drawn
and produced to F G in S. Seeing, therefore, R P is to P Q, that is, R M
to M S, as A B C D is to its complement B C D E, and the centres of
equiponderation of A B C D and B C D E are in the strait lines F G and H
I, and the centre of equiponderation of them both together in the point
M; R will be the centre of the complement B C D E, and S the centre of
the figure A B C D. And seeing P M, that is I N, is to Q S, as R P is to
R Q; and I N or P M is 3 of those parts, of which B E, that is F G, is
14; therefore Q S is 5 of the same parts; and E I, that is F G, 4; and F
S, 9; and G S, 5. Wherefore the strait line S T being drawn parallel to
the axis, will divide the base A D into 5 and 9. But the fraction 5⁄9 is
found in the fourth row of the table, two places below the fraction ⅗ in
the second row.

By the same method, if in the same second row there be taken the second
three-sided figure of three means, the centre of equiponderation of the
half of it will be found to be in a strait line parallel to the axis,
dividing the base according to the numbers of the fraction 6⁄10, two
places below in the fourth row. And the same way serves for all the rest
of the figures in the second row. In like manner, the centre of
equiponderation of the third three-sided figure of three means will be
found to be in a strait line parallel to the axis, dividing the base, so
that the part next the axis be to the other part as 7 to 13, &c.

Coroll. The centres of equiponderation of the halves of the said figures
are known, seeing they are in the intersection of the strait lines S T
and F G, which are both known.

[Sidenote: The centre of equiponderation of the half of any of the
           figures in the same table being known, the centre of the
           excess of the same figure above a triangle of the same
           altitude and base is also known.]

13. The centre of equiponderation of the half of any of the figures,
which (in the table of art. 3, chap. XVII) are compared with their
parallelograms, being known; the centre of equiponderation of the excess
of the same figure above its triangle is also known.

For example, let the semiparabola A B C D (in fig. 8) be taken, whose
axis is A B; whose complete figure is A B E D; and whose excess above
its triangle is B C D B. Its centre of equiponderation may be found out
in this manner. Let F G be drawn parallel to the base, so that A F be a
third part of the axis; and let H I be drawn parallel to the axis, so
that A H be a third part of the base. This being done, the centre of
equiponderation of the triangle A B D will be I. Again, let K L be drawn
parallel to the base, so that A K be to A B as 2 to 5; and M N parallel
to the axis, so that A M be to A D as 3 to 8; and let M N terminate in
the strait line K L. The centre, therefore, of equiponderation of the
parabola A B C D is N; and therefore we have the centres of
equiponderation of the semiparabola A B C D, and of its part the
triangle A B D. That we may now find the centre of equiponderation of
the remaining part B C D B, let I N be drawn and produced to O, so that
N O be triple to I N; and O will be the centre sought for. For seeing
the weight of A B D to the weight of B C D B is in proportion reciprocal
to that of the strait line N O to the strait line I N; and N is the
centre of the whole, and I the centre of the triangle A B D; O will be
the centre of the remaining part, namely, of the figure B D C B; which
was to be found.

Coroll. The centre of equiponderation of the figure B D C B is in the
concourse of two strait lines, whereof one is parallel to the base, and
divides the axis, so that the part next the base be ⅗ or 9⁄15 of the
whole axis; the other is parallel to the axis, and so divides the base,
that the part towards the axis be ½, or 12⁄24 of the whole base. For
drawing O P parallel to the base, it will be as I N to N O, so F K to K
P, that is, so 1 to 3, or 5 to 15. But A F is 5⁄15, or ⅓ of the whole A
B; and A K is 6⁄15, or ⅖; and F K 1⁄15; and KP 3⁄15; and therefore A P
is 9⁄15 of the axis A B. Also A H is ⅓, or 8⁄24; and A M ⅜, or 9⁄24 of
the whole base; and therefore O Q being drawn parallel to the axis, M Q,
which is triple to H M, will be 3⁄24. Wherefore A Q is 12⁄24, or ½ of
the base A D.

The excesses of the rest of the three-sided figures in the first row of
the table of art. 3, chap. XVII, have their centres of equiponderation
in two strait lines, which divide the axis and base according to those
fractions, which add 4 to the numerators of the fractions of a parabola
9⁄15 and 12⁄24; and 6 to the denominators, in this manner:—

 In a parabola,                    the axis 9⁄15, the base 12⁄24.
 In the first three-sided figure,  the axis 13⁄21, the base 16⁄30.
 In the second three-sided figure, the axis 17⁄27, the base 20⁄36, &c.

And by the same method, any man, if it be worth the pains, may find out
the centres of equiponderation of the excesses above their triangles of
the rest of the figures in the second and third row, &c.

[Sidenote: The centre of equiponderation of a solid sector is in the
           axis so divided, that the part next the vertex be to the
           whole axis, wanting half the axis of the portion of the
           sphere, as 3 to 4.]

14. The centre of equiponderation of the sector of a sphere, that is, of
a figure compounded of a right cone, whose vertex is the centre of the
sphere, and the portion of the sphere whose base is the same with that
of the cone, divides the strait line which is made of the axis of the
cone and half the axis of the portion together taken, so that the part
next the vertex be triple to the other part, or to the whole strait line
as 3 to 4.

For let A B C (in fig. 9) be the sector of a sphere, whose vertex is the
centre of the sphere A; whose axis is A D; and the circle upon B C is
the common base of the portion of the sphere and of the cone whose
vertex is A; the axis of which portion is E D, and the half thereof F D;
and the axis of the cone, A E. Lastly, let A G be 3⁄4 of the strait line
A F. I say, G is the centre of equiponderation of the sector A B C.

Let the strait line F H be drawn of any length, making right angles with
A F at F; and drawing the strait line A H, let the triangle A F H be
made. Then upon the same centre A let any arch I K be drawn, cutting A D
in L; and its chord, cutting A D in M; and dividing M L equally in N,
let N O be drawn parallel to the strait line F H, and meeting with the
strait line A H in O.

Seeing now B D C is the spherical superficies of the portion cut off
with a plane passing through B C, and cutting the axis at right angles;
and seeing F H divides E D, the axis of the portion, into two equal
parts in F; the centre of equiponderation of the superficies B D C will
be in F (by art. 8); and for the same reason the centre of
equiponderation of the superficies I L K, K being in the strait line A
C, will be in N. And in like manner, if there were drawn, between the
centre of the sphere A and the outermost spherical superficies of the
sector, arches infinite in number, the centres of equiponderation of the
spherical superficies, in which those arches are, would be found to be
in that part of the axis, which is intercepted between the superficies
itself and a plane passing along by the chord of the arch, and cutting
the axis in the middle at right angles.

Let it now be supposed that the moment of the outermost spherical
superficies B D C is F H. Seeing therefore the superficies B D C is to
the superficies I L K in proportion duplicate to that of the arch B D C
to the arch I L K, that is, of B E to I M, that is, of F H to N O; let
it be as F H to N O, so N O to another N P; and again, as N O to N P, so
N P to another N Q; and let this be done in all the strait lines
parallel to the base F H that can possibly be drawn between the base and
the vertex of the triangle A F H. If then through all the points Q there
be drawn the crooked line A Q H, the figure A F H Q A will be the
complement of the first three-sided figure of two means; and the same
will also be the moment of all the spherical superficies, of which the
solid sector A B C D is compounded; and by consequent, the moment of the
sector itself. Let now F H be understood to be the semidiameter of the
base of a right cone, whose side is A H, and axis A F Wherefore, seeing
the bases of the cones, which pass through F and N and the rest of the
points of the axis, are in proportion duplicate to that of the strait
lines F H and N O, &c., the moment of all the bases together, that is,
of the whole cone, will be the figure itself A F H Q A; and therefore
the centre of equiponderation of the cone A F H is the same with that of
the solid sector. Wherefore, seeing A G is ¾ of the axis A F, the centre
of equiponderation of the cone A F H is in G; and therefore the centre
of the solid sector is in G also, and divides the part A F of the axis
so that A G is triple to G F; that is, A G is to A F as 3 to 4; which
was to be demonstrated.

Note, that when the sector is a hemisphere, the axis of the cone
vanisheth into that point which is the centre of the sphere; and
therefore it addeth nothing to half the axis of the portion. Wherefore,
if in the axis of the hemisphere there be taken from the centre ¾ of
half the axis, that is, ⅜ of the semidiameter of the sphere, there will
be the centre of equiponderation of the hemisphere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  _Vol. 1. Lat. & Eng._
  C.XXIII.
  _Fig. 1-9_
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXIV.

                     OF REFRACTION AND REFLECTION.

1. Definitions.—2. In perpendicular motion there is no refraction.—3.
    Things thrown out of a thinner into a thicker medium are so
    refracted that the angle refracted is greater than the angle of
    inclination.—4. Endeavour, which from one point tendeth every way,
    will be so refracted, as that the sine of the angle refracted will
    be to the sine of the angle of inclination, as the density of the
    first medium is to the density of the second medium, reciprocally
    taken.—5. The sine of the refracted angle in one inclination is to
    the sine of the refracted angle in another inclination, as the sine
    of the angle of that inclination is to the sine of the angle of this
    inclination.—6. If two lines of incidence, having equal inclination,
    be the one in a thinner, the other in a thicker medium, the sine of
    the angle of inclination will be a mean proportional between the two
    sines of the refracted angles.—7. If the angle of inclination be
    semirect, and the line of inclination be in the thicker medium, and
    the proportion of their densities be the same with that of the
    diagonal to the side of a square, and the separating superficies be
    plane, the refracted line will be in the separating superficies.—8.
    If a body be carried in a strait line upon another body, and do not
    penetrate the same, but be reflected from it, the angle of
    reflection will be equal to the angle of incidence.—9. The same
    happens in the generation of motion in the line of incidence.


                              DEFINITIONS.

[Sidenote: Definitions.]

I. Refraction is the _breaking_ of that strait line, in which a body is
moved or its action would proceed in one and the same medium, into two
strait lines, by reason of the different natures of the two mediums.

II. The former of these is called the _line of incidence_; the latter
the _refracted line_. III. The _point of refraction_ is the common point
of the line of incidence, and of the refracted line.

IV. The _refracting superficies_, which also is the _separating
superficies_ of the two mediums, is that in which is the point of
refraction.

V. The _angle refracted_ is that, which the refracted line makes in the
point of refraction with that line, which from the same point is drawn
perpendicular to the separating superficies in a different medium.

VI. The _angle of refraction_ is that which the refracted line makes
with the line of incidence produced.

VII. The _angle of inclination_ is that which the line of incidence
makes with that line, which from the point of refraction is drawn
perpendicular to the separating superficies.

VIII. The _angle of incidence_ is the complement to a right angle of the
angle of inclination.

And so, (in fig. 1) the refraction is made in A B F. The refracted line
is B F. The line of incidence is A B. The point of incidence and of
refraction is B. The refracting or separating superficies is D B E. The
line of incidence produced directly is A B C. The perpendicular to the
separating superficies is B H. The angle of refraction is C B F. The
angle refracted is H B F. The angle of inclination is A B G or H B C.
The angle of incidence is A B D.

IX. Moreover the _thinner medium_ is understood to be that in which
there is less resistance to motion, or to the generation of motion; and
the thicker that wherein there is greater resistance.

X. And that medium in which there is equal resistance everywhere, is a
_homogeneous medium_. All other mediums are _heterogeneous_.

[Sidenote: In perpendicular motion there is no refraction.]

 If a body pass, or there be generation of motion from one medium to
another of different density, in a line perpendicular to the separating
superficies, there will be no refraction.

For seeing on every side of the perpendicular all things in the mediums
are supposed to be like and equal, if the motion itself be supposed to
be perpendicular, the inclinations also will be equal, or rather none at
all; and therefore there can be no cause from which refraction may be
inferred to be on one side of the perpendicular, which will not conclude
the same refraction to be on the other side. Which being so, refraction
on one side will destroy refraction on the other side; and consequently
either the refracted line will be everywhere, which is absurd, or there
will be no refracted line at all; which was to be demonstrated.

Coroll. It is manifest from hence, that the cause of refraction
consisteth only in the obliquity of the line of incidence, whether the
incident body penetrate both the mediums, or without penetrating,
propagate motion by pressure only.

[Sidenote: Things thrown out of a thinner into a thicker medium are so
           refracted that the angle refracted is greater than the angle
           of inclination.]

3. If a body, without any change of situation of its internal parts, as
a stone, be moved obliquely out of the thinner medium, and proceed
penetrating the thicker medium, and the thicker medium be such, as that
its internal parts being moved restore themselves to their former
situation; the angle refracted will be greater than the angle of
inclination.

For let D B E (in the same first figure) be the separating superficies
of two mediums; and let a body, as a stone thrown, be understood to be
moved as is supposed in the strait line A B C; and let A B be in the
thinner medium, as in the air; and B C in the thicker, as in the water.
I say the stone, which being thrown, is moved in the line A B, will not
proceed in the line B C, but in some other line, namely, that, with
which the perpendicular B H makes the refracted angle H B F greater than
the angle of inclination H B C.

For seeing the stone coming from A, and falling upon B, makes that which
is at B proceed towards H, and that the like is done in all the strait
lines which are parallel to B H; and seeing the parts moved restore
themselves by contrary motion in the same line; there will be contrary
motion generated in H B, and in all the strait lines which are parallel
to it. Wherefore, the motion of the stone will be made by the concourse
of the motions in A G, that is, in D B, and in G B, that is, in B H, and
lastly, in H B, that is, by the concourse of three motions. But by the
concourse of the motions in A G and B H, the stone will be carried to C;
and therefore by adding the motion in H B, it will be carried higher in
some other line, as in B F, and make the angle H B F greater than the
angle H B C.

And from hence may be derived the cause, why bodies which are thrown in
a very oblique line, if either they be any thing flat, or be thrown with
great force, will, when they fall upon the water, be cast up again from
the water into the air.

For let A B (in fig. 2) be the superficies of the water; into which,
from the point C, let a stone be thrown in the strait line C A, making
with the line B A produced a very little angle C A D; and producing B A
indefinitely to D, let C D be drawn perpendicular to it, and A E
parallel to C D. The stone therefore will be moved in C A by the
concourse of two motions in C D and D A, whose velocities are as the
lines themselves C D and D A. And from the motion in C D and all its
parallels downwards, as soon as the stone falls upon A, there will be
reaction upwards, because the water restores itself to its former
situation. If now the stone be thrown with sufficient obliquity, that
is, if the strait line C D be short enough, that is, if the endeavour of
the stone downwards be less than the reaction of the water upwards, that
is, less than the endeavour it hath from its own gravity (for that may
be), the stone will by reason of the excess of the endeavour which the
water hath to restore itself, above that which the stone hath downwards,
be raised again above the superficies A B, and be carried higher, being
reflected in a line which goes higher, as the line A G.

[Sidenote: Endeavour, which from one point tendeth every way, will be so
           refracted, as that the sine of the angle refracted will be to
           the sine of the angle of inclination, as the density of the
           first medium is to the density of the second medium,
           reciprocally taken.]

4. If from a point, whatsoever the medium be, endeavour be propagated
every way into all the parts of that medium; and to the same endeavour
there be obliquely opposed another medium of a different nature, that
is, either thinner or thicker; that endeavour will be so refracted, that
the sine of the angle refracted, to the sine of the angle of
inclination, will be as the density of the first medium to the density
of the second medium, reciprocally taken.

First, let a body be in the thinner medium in A (fig. 3), and let it be
understood to have endeavour every way, and consequently, that its
endeavour proceed in the lines A B and A _b_; to which let B _b_ the
superficies of the thicker medium be obliquely opposed in B and _b_, so
that A B and A _b_ be equal; and let the strait line B _b_ be produced
both ways. From the points B and _b_, let the perpendiculars B C and _b
c_ be drawn; and upon the centres B and _b_, and at the equal distances
B A and _b_ A, let the circles A C and A _c_ be described, cutting B C
and _b c_ in C and _c_, and the same C B and _c b_ produced in D and
_d_, as also A B and A _b_ produced in E and _e_. Then from the point A
to the strait lines B C and _b c_ let the perpendiculars A F and A _f_
be drawn. A F therefore will be the sine of the angle of inclination of
the strait line A B, and A _f_ the sine of the angle of inclination of
the strait line A _h_, which two inclinations are by construction made
equal. I say, as the density of the medium in which are B C and _b c_ is
to the density of the medium in which are B D and _b d_, so is the sine
of the angle refracted, to the sine of the angle of inclination.

Let the strait line F G be drawn parallel to the strait line A B,
meeting with the strait line _b_ B produced in G.

Seeing therefore A F and B G are also parallels, they will be equal; and
consequently, the endeavour in A F is propagated in the same time, in
which the endeavour in B G would be propagated if the medium were of the
same density. But because B G is in a thicker medium, that is, in a
medium which resists the endeavour more than the medium in which A F is,
the endeavour will be propagated less in B G than in A F, according to
the proportion which the density of the medium, in which A F is, hath to
the density of the medium in which B G is. Let therefore the density of
the medium, in which B G is, be to the density of the medium, in which A
F is, as B G is to B H; and let the measure of the time be the radius of
the circle. Let H I be drawn parallel to B D, meeting with the
circumference in I; and from the point I let I K be drawn perpendicular
to B D; which being done, B H and I K will be equal; and I K will be to
A F, as the density of the medium in which is A F is to the density of
the medium in which is I K. Seeing therefore in the time A B, which is
the radius of the circle, the endeavour is propagated in A F in the
thinner medium, it will be propagated in the same time, that is, in the
time B I in the thicker medium from K to I. Therefore, B I is the
refracted line of the line of incidence A B; and I K is the sine of the
angle refracted; and A F the sine of the angle of inclination.
Wherefore, seeing I K is to A F, as the density of the medium in which
is A F to the density of the medium in which is I K; it will be as the
density of the medium in which is A F or B C to the density of the
medium in which is I K or B D, so the sine of the angle refracted to the
sine of the angle of inclination. And by the same reason it may be
shown, that as the density of the thinner medium is to the density of
the thicker medium, so will K I the sine of the angle refracted be to A
F the sine of the angle of inclination.

Secondly, let the body, which endeavoureth every way, be in the thicker
medium at I. If, therefore, both the mediums were of the same density,
the endeavour of the body in I B would tend directly to L; and the sine
of the angle of inclination L M would be equal to I K or B H. But
because the density of the medium, in which is I K, to the density of
the medium, in which is L M, is as B H to B G, that is, to A F, the
endeavour will be propagated further in the medium in which L M is, than
in the medium in which I K is, in the proportion of density to density,
that is, of M L to A F. Wherefore, B A being drawn, the angle refracted
will be C B A, and its sine A F. But L M is the sine of the angle of
inclination; and therefore again, as the density of one medium is to the
density of the different medium, so reciprocally is the sine of the
angle refracted to the sine of the angle of inclination; which was to be
demonstrated.

In this demonstration, I have made the separating superficies B _b_
plane by construction. But though it were concave or convex, the theorem
would nevertheless be true. For the refraction being made in the point B
of the plane separating superficies, if a crooked line, as P Q, be
drawn, touching the separating line in the point B; neither the
refracted line B I, nor the perpendicular B D, will be altered; and the
refracted angle K B I, as also its sine K I, will be still the same they
were.

[Sidenote: The sine of the refracted angle in one inclination is to the
           sine of the refracted angle in another inclination, as the
           sine of the angle of that inclination is to the sine of the
           angle of this inclination.]

5. The sine of the angle refracted in one inclination is to the sine of
the angle refracted in another inclination, as the sine of the angle of
that inclination to the sine of the angle of this inclination.

For seeing the sine of the refracted angle is to the sine of the angle
of inclination, whatsoever that inclination be, as the density of one
medium to the density of the other medium; the proportion of the sine of
the refracted angle, to the sine of the angle of inclination, will be
compounded of the proportions of density to density, and of the sine of
the angle of one inclination to the sine of the angle of the other
inclination. But the proportions of the densities in the same
homogeneous body are supposed to be the same. Wherefore refracted angles
in different inclinations are as the sines of the angles of those
inclinations; which was to be demonstrated.

[Sidenote: If two lines of incidence, having equal inclination, be one
           in a thinner the other in a thicker medium, the sine of the
           angle of inclination will be a mean proportional between the
           two sines of the refracted angles.]

6. If two lines of incidence, having equal inclination, be the one in a
thinner, the other in a thicker medium, the sine of the angle of their
inclination will be a mean proportional between the two sines of their
angles refracted.

For let the strait line A B (in fig. 3) have its inclination in the
thinner medium, and be refracted in the thicker medium in B I; and let E
B have as much inclination in the thicker medium, and be refracted in
the thinner medium in B S; and let R S, the sine of the angle refracted,
be drawn. I say, the strait lines R S, A F, and I K are in continual
proportion. For it is, as the density of the thicker medium to the
density of the thinner medium, so R S to A F. But it is also as the
density of the same thicker medium to that of the same thinner medium,
so A F to I K. Wherefore R S. A F :: A F. I K are proportionals; that
is, R S, A F, and I K are in continual proportion, and A F is the mean
proportional; which was to be proved.

[Sidenote: If the angle of inclination be semirect, and the line of
           inclination be in the thicker medium, and the proportion of
           their densities be the same with that of the diagonal to the
           side of a square, and the separating superficies be plain,
           the refracted line will be in the separating superficies.]

7. If the angle of inclination be semirect, and the line of inclination
be in the thicker medium, and the proportion of the densities be as that
of a diagonal to the side of its square, and the separating superficies
be plain, the refracted line will be in that separating superficies.

For in the circle A C (fig. 4) let the angle of inclination A B C be an
angle of 45 degrees. Let C B be produced to the circumference in D; and
let C E, the sine of the angle E B C, be drawn, to which let B F be
taken equal in the separating line B G. B C E F will therefore be a
parallelogram, and F E and B C, that is F E and B G equal. Let A G be
drawn, namely the diagonal of the square whose side is B G, and it will
be, as A G to E F so B G to B F; and so, by supposition, the density of
the medium, in which C is, to the density of the medium in which D is;
and so also the sine of the angle refracted to the sine of the angle of
inclination. Drawing therefore F D, and from D the line D H
perpendicular to A B produced, D H will be the sine of the angle of
inclination. And seeing the sine of the angle refracted is to the sine
of the angle of inclination, as the density of the medium, in which is
C, is to the density of the medium in which is D, that is, by
supposition, as A G is to F E, that is as B G is to D H; and seeing D H
is the sine of the angle of inclination, B G will therefore be the sine
of the angle refracted. Wherefore B G will be the refracted line, and
lye in the plain separating superficies; which was to be demonstrated.

Coroll. It is therefore manifest, that when the inclination is greater
than 45 degrees, as also when it is less, provided the density be
greater, it may happen that the refraction will not enter the thinner
medium at all.

[Sidenote: If a body be carried in a strait line upon another body, and
           do not penetrate it, but be reflected from it, the angle of
           reflection will be equal to the angle of incidence.]

8. If a body fall in a strait line upon another body, and do not
penetrate it, but be reflected from it, the angle of reflection will be
equal to the angle of incidence.

Let there be a body at A (in fig. 5), which falling with strait motion
in the line A C upon another body at C, passeth no further, but is
reflected; and let the angle of incidence be any angle, as A C D. Let
the strait line C E be drawn, making with D C produced the angle E C F
equal to the angle A C D; and let A D be drawn perpendicular to the
strait line D F. Also in the same strait line D F let C G be taken equal
to C D; and let the perpendicular G E be raised, cutting C E in E. This
being done, the triangles A C D and E C G will be equal and like. Let C
H be drawn equal and parallel to the strait line A D; and let H C be
produced indefinitely to I. Lastly let E A be drawn, which will pass
through H, and be parallel and equal to G D. I say the motion from A to
C, in the strait line of incidence A C, will be reflected in the strait
line C E.

For the motion from A to C is made by two coefficient or concurrent
motions, the one in A H parallel to D G, the other in A D perpendicular
to the same D G; of which two motions that in A H works nothing upon the
body A after it has been moved as far as C, because, by supposition, it
doth not pass the strait line D G; whereas the endeavour in A D, that is
in H C, worketh further towards I. But seeing it doth only press and not
penetrate, there will be reaction in H, which causeth motion from C
towards H; and in the meantime the motion in H E remains the same it was
in A H; and therefore the body will now be moved by the concourse of two
motions in C H and H E, which are equal to the two motions it had
formerly in A H and H C. Wherefore it will be carried on in C E. The
angle therefore of reflection will be E C G, equal, by construction, to
the angle A C D; which was to be demonstrated.

Now when the body is considered but as a point, it is all one whether
the superficies or line in which the reflection is made be strait or
crooked; for the point of incidence and reflection C is as well in the
crooked line which toucheth D G in C, as in D G itself.

[Sidenote: The same happens in the generation of motion in the line of
           incidence.]

9. But if we suppose that not a body be moved, but some endeavour only
be propagated from A to C, the demonstration will nevertheless be the
same. For all endeavour is motion; and when it hath reached the solid
body in C, it presseth it, and endeavoureth further in C I. Wherefore
the reaction will proceed in C H; and the endeavour in C H concurring
with the endeavour in H E, will generate the endeavour in C E, in the
same manner as in the repercussion of bodies moved.

If therefore endeavour be propagated from any point to the concave
superficies of a spherical body, the reflected line with the
circumference of a great circle in the same sphere will make an angle
equal to the angle of incidence.

For if endeavour be propagated from A (in fig. 6) to the circumference
in B, and the centre of the sphere be C, and the line C B be drawn, as
also the tangent D B E; and lastly if the angle F B D be made equal to
the angle A B E, the reflection will be made in the line B F, as hath
been newly shown. Wherefore the angles, which the strait lines A B and F
B make with the circumference, will also be equal. But it is here to be
noted, that if C B be produced howsoever to G, the endeavour in the line
G B C will proceed only from the perpendicular reaction in G B; and that
therefore there will be no other endeavour in the point B towards the
parts which are within the sphere, besides that which tends towards the
centre.

And here I put an end to the third part of this discourse; in which I
have considered motion and magnitude by themselves in the abstract. The
fourth and last part, concerning the _phenomena of nature_, that is to
say, concerning the motions and magnitudes of the bodies which are parts
of the world, real and existent, is that which follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  _Vol. 1. Lat. & Eng._
  C. XXIV.
  _Fig. 1-6_
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                PART IV.
                                PHYSICS,
                      OR THE PHENOMENA OF NATURE.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XXV.
                      OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION.

1. The connexion of what hath been said with that which followeth.—2.
    The investigation of the nature of sense, and the definition of
    sense.—3. The subject and object of sense.—4. The organs of
    sense.—5. All bodies are not indued with sense.—6. But one phantasm
    at one and the same time.—7. Imagination the remains of past sense,
    which also is memory. Of sleep.—8. How phantasms succeed one
    another.—9. Dreams, whence they proceed.—10. Of the senses, their
    kinds, their organs, and phantasms proper and common.—11. The
    magnitude of images, how and by what it is determined.—12. Pleasure,
    pain, appetite and aversion, what they are.—13. Deliberation and
    will, what.


[Sidenote: The connexion of what hath been said with that which
           followeth.]

1. I have, in the first chapter, defined philosophy to be _knowledge of
effects acquired by true ratiocination, from knowledge first had of
their causes and generation; and of such causes or generations as may
be, from former knowledge of their effects or appearances_. There are,
therefore, two methods of philosophy; one, from the generation of things
to their possible effects; and the other, from their effects or
appearances to some possible generation of the same. In the former of
these the truth of the first principles of our ratiocination, namely
definitions, is made and constituted by ourselves, whilst we consent and
agree about the appellations of things. And this part I have finished in
the foregoing chapters; in which, if I am not deceived, I have affirmed
nothing, saving the definitions themselves, which hath not good
coherence with the definitions I have given; that is to say, which is
not sufficiently demonstrated to all those, that agree with me in the
use of words and appellations; for whose sake only I have written the
same. I now enter upon the other part; which is the finding out by the
appearances or effects of nature, which we know by sense, some ways and
means by which they may be, I do not say they are, generated. The
principles, therefore, upon which the following discourse depends, are
not such as we ourselves make and pronounce in general terms, as
definitions; but such, as being placed in the things themselves by the
Author of Nature, are by us observed in them; and we make use of them in
single and particular, not universal propositions. Nor do they impose
upon us any necessity of constituting theorems; their use being only,
though not without such general propositions as have been already
demonstrated, to show us the possibility of some production or
generation. Seeing, therefore, the science, which is here taught, hath
its principles in the appearances of nature, and endeth in the attaining
of some knowledge of natural causes, I have given to this part the title
of PHYSICS, or the _Phenomena of Nature_. Now such things as appear, or
are shown to us by nature, we call phenomena or appearances.

Of all the phenomena or appearances which are near us, the most
admirable is apparition itself, τὸ φαίνεσθαι; namely, that some natural
bodies have in themselves the patterns almost of all things, and others
of none at all. So that if the appearances be the principles by which we
know all other things, we must needs acknowledge sense to be the
principle by which we know those principles, and that all the knowledge
we have is derived from it. And as for the causes of sense, we cannot
begin our search of them from any other phenomenon than that of sense
itself. But you will say, by what sense shall we take notice of sense? I
answer, by sense itself, namely, by the memory which for some time
remains in us of things sensible, though they themselves pass away. For
he that perceives that he hath perceived, remembers.

In the first place, therefore, the causes of our perception, that is,
the causes of those ideas and phantasms which are perpetually generated
within us whilst we make use of our senses, are to be enquired into; and
in what manner their generation proceeds. To help which inquisition, we
may observe first of all, that our phantasms or ideas are not always the
same; but that new ones appear to us, and old ones vanish, according as
we apply our organs of sense, now to one object, now to another.
Wherefore they are generated, and perish. And from hence it is manifest,
that they are some change or mutation in the sentient.

[Sidenote: The investigation of the nature of sense, and the definition
           of sense.]

2. Now that all mutation or alteration is motion or endeavour (and
endeavour also is motion) in the internal parts of the thing that is
altered, hath been proved (in art. 9, chap. VIII) from this, that whilst
even the least parts of any body remain in the same situation in respect
of one another, it cannot be said that any alteration, unless perhaps
that the whole body together hath been moved, hath happened to it; but
that it both appeareth and is the same it appeared and was before.
Sense, therefore, in the sentient, can be nothing else but motion in
some of the internal parts of the sentient; and the parts so moved are
parts of the organs of sense. For the parts of our body, by which we
perceive any thing, are those we commonly call the organs of sense. And
so we find what is the subject of our sense, namely, that in which are
the phantasms; and partly also we have discovered the nature of sense,
namely, that it is some internal motion in the sentient.

I have shown besides (in chap. IX, art. 7) that no motion is generated
but by a body contiguous and moved: from whence it is manifest, that the
immediate cause of sense or perception consists in this, that the first
organ of sense is touched and pressed. For when the uttermost part of
the organ is pressed, it no sooner yields, but the part next within it
is pressed also; and, in this manner, the pressure or motion is
propagated through all the parts of the organ to the innermost. And thus
also the pressure of the uttermost part proceeds from the pressure of
some more remote body, and so continually, till we come to that from
which, as from its fountain, we derive the phantasm or idea that is made
in us by our sense. And this, whatsoever it be, is that we commonly call
_the object_, Sense, therefore, is some internal motion in the sentient,
generated by some internal motion of the parts of the object, and
propagated through all the media to the innermost part of the organ. By
which words I have almost defined what sense is.

Moreover, I have shown (art. 2, chap. XV) that all resistance is
endeavour opposite to another endeavour, that is to say, reaction.
Seeing, therefore, there is in the whole organ, by reason of its own
internal natural motion, some resistance or reaction against the motion
which is propagated from the object to the innermost part of the organ,
there is also in the same organ an endeavour opposite to the endeavour
which proceeds from the object; so that when that endeavour inwards is
the last action in the act of sense, then from the reaction, how little
soever the duration of it be, a phantasm or idea hath its being; which,
by reason that the endeavour is now outwards, doth always appear as
something situate without the organ. So that now I shall give you the
whole definition of sense, as it is drawn from the explication of the
causes thereof and the order of its generation, thus: SENSE _is a
phantasm, made by the reaction and endeavour outwards in the organ of
sense, caused by an endeavour inwards from the object, remaining for
some time more or less_.

[Sidenote: The subject and object of sense.]

3. The _subject_ of sense is the _sentient_ itself, namely, some living
creature; and we speak more correctly, when we say a living creature
seeth, than when we say the eye seeth. The object is the thing received;
and it is more accurately said, that we see the sun, than that we see
the light. For light and colour, and heat and sound, and other qualities
which are commonly called sensible, are not objects, but phantasms in
the sentients. For a phantasm is the act of sense, and differs no
otherwise from sense than _fieri_, that is, being a doing, differs from
_factum esse_, that is, being done; which difference, in things that are
done in an instant, is none at all; and a phantasm is made in an
instant. For in all motion which proceeds by perpetual propagation, the
first part being moved moves the second, the second the third, and so on
to the last, and that to any distance, how great soever. And in what
point of time the first or foremost part proceeded to the place of the
second, which is thrust on, in the same point of time the last save one
proceeded into the place of the last yielding part; which by reaction,
in the same instant, if the reaction be strong enough, makes a phantasm;
and a phantasm being made, perception is made together with it.

[Sidenote: The organs of sense.]

4. The _organs_ of sense, which are in the sentient, are such parts
thereof, that if they be hurt, the very generation of phantasms is
thereby destroyed, though all the rest of the parts remain entire. Now
these parts in the most of living creatures are found to be certain
spirits and membranes, which, proceeding from the _pia mater_, involve
the brain and all the nerves; also the brain itself, and the arteries
which are in the brain; and such other parts, as being stirred, the
heart also, which is the fountain of all sense, is stirred together with
them. For whensoever the action of the object reacheth the body of the
sentient, that action is by some nerve propagated to the brain; and if
the nerve leading thither be so hurt or obstructed, that the motion can
be propagated no further, no sense follows. Also if the motion be
intercepted between the brain and the heart by the defect of the organ
by which the action is propagated, there will be no perception of the
object.

[Sidenote: All bodies are not endued with sense.]

5. But though all sense, as I have said, be made by reaction,
nevertheless it is not necessary that every thing that reacteth should
have sense. I know there have been philosophers, and those learned men,
who have maintained that all bodies are endued with sense. Nor do I see
how they can be refuted, if the nature of sense be placed in reaction
only. And, though by the reaction of bodies inanimate a phantasm might
be made, it would nevertheless cease, as soon as ever the object were
removed. For unless those bodies had organs, as living creatures have,
fit for the retaining of such motion as is made in them, their sense
would be such, as that they should never remember the same. And
therefore this hath nothing to do with that sense which is the subject
of my discourse. For by sense, we commonly understand the judgment we
make of objects by their phantasms; namely, by comparing and
distinguishing those phantasms; which we could never do, if that motion
in the organ, by which the phantasm is made, did not remain there for
some time, and make the same phantasm return. Wherefore sense, as I here
understand it, and which is commonly so called, hath necessarily some
memory adhering to it, by which former and later phantasms may be
compared together, and distinguished from one another.

Sense, therefore, properly so called, must necessarily have in it a
perpetual variety of phantasms, that they may be discerned one from
another. For if we should suppose a man to be made with clear eyes, and
all the rest of his organs of sight well disposed, but endued with no
other sense; and that he should look only upon one thing, which is
always of the same colour and figure, without the least appearance of
variety, he would seem to me, whatsoever others may say, to see, no more
than I seem to myself to feel the bones of my own limbs by my organs of
feeling; and yet those bones are always and on all sides touched by a
most sensible membrane. I might perhaps say he were astonished, and
looked upon it; but I should not say he saw it; it being almost all one
for a man to be always sensible of one and the same thing, and not to be
sensible at all of any thing.

[Sidenote: But one phantasm at one and the same time.]

6. And yet such is the nature of sense, that it does not permit a man to
discern many things at once. For seeing the nature of sense consists in
motion; as long as the organs are employed about one object, they cannot
be so moved by another at the same time, as to make by both their
motions one sincere phantasm of each of them at once. And therefore two
several phantasms will not be made by two objects working together, but
only one phantasm compounded from the action of both.

Besides, as when we divide a body, we divide its place; and when we
reckon many bodies, we must necessarily reckon as many places; and
contrarily, as I have shown in the seventh chapter; so what number
soever we say there be of times, we must understand the same number of
motions also; and as oft as we count many motions, so oft we reckon many
times. For though the object we look upon be of divers colours, yet with
those divers colours it is but one varied object, and not variety of
objects.

Moreover, whilst those organs which are common to all the senses, such
as are those parts of every organ which proceed in men from the root of
the nerves to the heart, are vehemently stirred by a strong action from
some one object, they are, by reason of the contumacy which the motion,
they have already, gives them against the reception of all other motion,
made the less fit to receive any other impression from whatsoever other
objects, to what sense soever those objects belong. And hence it is,
that an earnest studying of one object, takes away the sense of all
other objects for the present. For _study_ is nothing else but a
possession of the mind, that is to say, a vehement motion made by some
one object in the organs of sense, which are stupid to all other motions
as long as this lasteth; according to what was said by Terence,
“_Populus studio stupidus in funambulo animum occuparat._” For what is
_stupor_ but that which the Greeks call ἀναισθησία, that is, a cessation
from the sense of other things? Wherefore at one and the same time, we
cannot by sense perceive more than one single object; as in reading, we
see the letters successively one by one, and not all together, though
the whole page be presented to our eye; and though every several letter
be distinctly written there, yet when we look upon the whole page at
once, we read nothing.

From hence it is manifest, that every endeavour of the organ outwards,
is not to be called sense, but that only, which at several times is by
vehemence made stronger and more predominant than the rest; which
deprives us of the sense of other phantasms, no otherwise than the sun
deprives the rest of the stars of light, not by hindering their action,
but by obscuring and hiding them with his excess of brightness.

[Sidenote: Imagination, the remains of past sense; which also is memory.
           Of sleep.]

7. But the motion of the organ, by which a phantasm is made, is not
commonly called sense, except the object be present. And the phantasm
remaining after the object is removed or past by, is called _fancy_, and
in Latin _imaginatio_; which word, because all phantasms are not images,
doth not fully answer the signification of the word _fancy_ in its
general acceptation. Nevertheless I may use it safely enough, by
understanding it for the Greek Φαντασία.

IMAGINATION therefore is nothing else but _sense decaying_, or
_weakened_, by the absence of the object. But what may be the cause of
this decay or weakening? Is the motion the weaker, because the object is
taken away? If it were, then phantasms would always and necessarily be
less clear in the imagination, than they are in sense; which is not
true. For in dreams, which are the imaginations of those that sleep,
they are no less clear than in sense itself. But the reason why in men
waking the phantasms of things past are more obscure than those of
things present, is this, that their organs being at the same time moved
by other present objects, those phantasms are the less predominant.
Whereas in sleep, the passages being shut up, external action doth not
at all disturb or hinder internal motion.

If this be true, the next thing to be considered, will be, whether any
cause may be found out, from the supposition whereof it will follow,
that the passage is shut up from the external objects of sense to the
internal organ. I suppose, therefore, that by the continual action of
objects, to which a reaction of the organ, and more especially of the
spirits, is necessarily consequent, the organ is wearied, that is, its
parts are no longer moved by the spirits without some pain; and
consequently the nerves being abandoned and grown slack, they retire to
their fountain, which is the cavity either of the brain or of the heart;
by which means the action which proceeded by the nerves is necessarily
intercepted. For action upon a patient, that retires from it, makes but
little impression at the first; and at last, when the nerves are by
little and little slackened, none at all. And therefore there is no more
reaction, that is, no more sense, till the organ being refreshed by
rest, and by a supply of new spirits recovering strength and motion, the
sentient awaketh. And thus it seems to be always, unless some other
preternatural cause intervene; as heat in the internal parts from
lassitude, or from some disease stirring the spirits and other parts of
the organ in some extraordinary manner.

[Sidenote: How phantasms succeed one another.]

8. Now it is not without cause, nor so casual a thing as many perhaps
think it, that phantasms in this their great variety proceed from one
another; and that the same phantasms sometimes bring into the mind other
phantasms like themselves, and at other times extremely unlike. For in
the motion of any continued body, one part follows another by cohesion;
and therefore, whilst we turn our eyes and other organs successively to
many objects, the motion which was made by every one of them remaining,
the phantasms are renewed as often as any one of those motions comes to
be predominant above the rest; and they become predominant in the same
order in which at any time formerly they were generated by sense. So
that when by length of time very many phantasms have been generated
within us by sense, then almost any thought may arise from any other
thought; insomuch that it may seem to be a thing indifferent and casual,
which thought shall follow which. But for the most part this is not so
uncertain a thing to waking as to sleeping men. For the thought or
phantasm of the desired end brings in all the phantasms, that are means
conducing to that end, and that in order backwards from the last to the
first, and again forwards from the beginning to the end. But this
supposes both appetite, and judgment to discern what means conduce to
the end, which is gotten by experience; and experience is store of
phantasms, arising from the sense of very many things. For φανταζεσθαι
and _meminisse_, _fancy_ and _memory_, differ only in this, that memory
supposeth the time past, which fancy doth not. In memory, the phantasms
we consider are as if they were worn out with time; but in our fancy we
consider them as they are; which distinction is not of the things
themselves, but of the considerations of the sentient. For there is in
memory something like that which happens in looking upon things at a
great distance; in which as the small parts of the object are not
discerned, by reason of their remoteness; so in memory, many accidents
and places and parts of things, which were formerly perceived by sense,
are by length of time decayed and lost.

The perpetual arising of phantasms, both in sense and imagination, is
that which we commonly call discourse of the mind, and is common to men
with other living creatures. For he that thinketh, compareth the
phantasms that pass, that is, taketh notice of their likeness or
unlikeness to one another. And as he that observes readily the
likenesses of things of different natures, or that are very remote from
one another, is said to have a good fancy; so he is said to have a good
judgment, that finds out the unlikenesses or differences of things that
are like one another. Now this observation of differences is not
perception made by a common organ of sense, distinct from sense or
perception properly so called, but is memory of the differences of
particular phantasms remaining for some time; as the distinction between
hot and lucid, is nothing else but the memory both of a heating, and of
an enlightening object.

[Sidenote: Dreams, whence they proceed.]

9. The phantasms of men that sleep, are _dreams_. Concerning which we
are taught by experience these five things. First, that for the most
part there is neither order nor coherence in them. Secondly, that we
dream of nothing but what is compounded and made up of the phantasms of
sense past. Thirdly, that sometimes they proceed, as in those that are
drowsy, from the interruption of their phantasms by little and little,
broken and altered through sleepiness; and sometimes also they begin in
the midst of sleep. Fourthly, that they are clearer than the
imaginations of waking men, except such as are made by sense itself, to
which they are equal in clearness. Fifthly, that when we dream, we
admire neither the places nor the looks of the things that appear to us.
Now from what hath been said, it is not hard to show what may be the
causes of these phenomena. For as for the first, seeing all order and
coherence proceeds from frequent looking back to the end, that is, from
consultation; it must needs be, that seeing in sleep we lose all thought
of the end, our phantasms succeed one another, not in that order which
tends to any end, but as it happeneth, and in such manner, as objects
present themselves to our eyes when we look indifferently upon all
things before us, and see them, not because we would see them, but
because we do not shut our eyes; for then they appear to us without any
order at all. The second proceeds from this, that in the silence of
sense there is no new motion from the objects, and therefore no new
phantasm, unless we call that new, which is compounded of old ones, as a
chimera, a golden mountain, and the like. As for the third, why a dream
is sometimes as it were the continuation of sense, made up of broken
phantasms, as in men distempered with sickness, the reason is manifestly
this, that in some of the organs sense remains, and in others it
faileth. But how some phantasms may be revived, when all the exterior
organs are benumbed with sleep, is not so easily shown. Nevertheless
that, which hath already been said, contains the reason of this also.
For whatsoever strikes the _pia mater_, reviveth some of those phantasms
that are still in motion in the brain; and when any internal motion of
the heart reacheth that membrane, then the predominant motion in the
brain makes the phantasm. Now the motions of the heart are appetites and
aversions, of which I shall presently speak further. And as appetites
and aversions are generated by phantasms, so reciprocally phantasms are
generated by appetites and aversions. For example, heat in the heart
proceeds from anger and fighting; and again, from heat in the heart,
whatsoever be the cause of it, is generated anger and the image of an
enemy, in sleep. And as love and beauty stir up heat in certain organs;
so heat in the same organs, from whatsoever it proceeds, often causeth
desire and the image of an unresisting beauty. Lastly, cold doth in the
same manner generate fear in those that sleep, and causeth them to dream
of ghosts, and to have phantasms of horror and danger; as fear also
causeth cold in those that wake. So reciprocal are the motions of the
heart and brain. The fourth, namely, that the things we seem to see and
feel in sleep, are as clear as in sense itself, proceeds from two
causes; one, that having then no sense of things without us, that
internal motion which makes the phantasm, in the absence of all other
impressions, is predominant; and the other, that the parts of our
phantasms which are decayed and worn out by time, are made up with other
fictitious parts. To conclude, when we dream, we do not wonder at
strange places and the appearances of things unknown to us, because
admiration requires that the things appearing be new and unusual, which
can happen to none but those that remember former appearances; whereas
in sleep, all things appear as present.

But it is here to be observed, that certain dreams, especially such as
some men have when they are between sleeping and waking, and such as
happen to those that have no knowledge of the nature of dreams and are
withal superstitious, were not heretofore nor are now accounted dreams.
For the apparitions men thought they saw, and the voices they thought
they heard in sleep, were not believed to be phantasms, but things
subsisting of themselves, and objects without those that dreamed. For to
some men, as well sleeping as waking, but especially to guilty men, and
in the night, and in hallowed places, fear alone, helped a little with
the stories of such apparitions, hath raised in their minds terrible
phantasms, which have been and are still deceitfully received for things
really true, under the names of _ghosts_ and _incorporeal substances_.

[Sidenote: Of the senses, their kinds, their organs and phantasms,
           proper and common.]

10. In most living creatures there are observed five kinds of senses,
which are distinguished by their organs, and by their different kinds of
phantasms; namely, _sight_, _hearing_, _smell_, _taste_, and _touch_;
and these have their organs partly peculiar to each of them severally,
and partly common to them all. The organ of sight is partly animate, and
partly inanimate. The inanimate parts are the three humours; namely, the
watery humour, which by the interposition of the membrane called uvea,
the perforation whereof is called the apple of the eye, is contained on
one side by the first concave superficies of the eye, and on the other
side by the ciliary processes, and the coat of the crystalline humour;
the crystalline, which, hanging in the midst between the ciliary
processes, and being almost of spherical figure, and of a thick
consistence, is enclosed on all sides with its own transparent coat; and
the vitreous or glassy humour, which filleth all the rest of the cavity
of the eye, and is somewhat thicker then the watery humour, but thinner
than the crystalline. The animate part of the organ is, first, the
membrane _choroeides_, which is a part of the _pia mater_, saving that
it is covered with a coat derived from the marrow of the optic nerve,
which is called the _retina_; and this _choroeides_, seeing it is part
of the _pia mater_, is continued to the beginning of the _medulla
spinalis_ within the scull, in which all the nerves which are within the
head have their roots. Wherefore all the animal spirits that the nerves
receive, enter into them there; for it is not imaginable that they can
enter into them anywhere else. Seeing therefore sense is nothing else
but the action of objects propagated to the furthest part of the organ;
and seeing also that animal spirits are nothing but vital spirits
purified by the heart, and carried from it by the arteries; it follows
necessarily, that the action is derived from the heart by some of the
arteries to the roots of the nerves which are in the head, whether those
arteries be the _plexus retiformis_, or whether they be other arteries
which are inserted into the substance of the brain. And, therefore,
those arteries are the complement or the remaining part of the whole
organ of sight. And this last part is a common organ to all the senses;
whereas, that which reacheth from the eye to the roots of the nerves is
proper only to sight. The proper organ of hearing is the tympanum of the
ear and its own nerve; from which to the heart the organ is common. So
the proper organs of smell and taste are nervous membranes, in the
palate and tongue for the taste, and in the nostrils for the smell; and
from the roots of those nerves to the heart all is common. Lastly, the
proper organ of touch are nerves and membranes dispersed through the
whole body; which membranes are derived from the root of the nerves. And
all things else belonging alike to all the senses seem to be
administered by the arteries, and not by the nerves.

The proper phantasm of sight is light; and under this name of light,
colour also, which is nothing but perturbed light, is comprehended.
Wherefore the phantasm of a lucid body is light; and of a coloured body,
colour. But the object of sight, properly so called, is neither light
nor colour, but the body itself which is lucid, or enlightened, or
coloured. For light and colour, being phantasms of the sentient, cannot
be accidents of the object. Which is manifest enough from this, that
visible things appear oftentimes in places in which we know assuredly
they are not, and that in different places they are of different
colours, and may at one and the same time appear in divers places.
Motion, rest, magnitude, and figure, are common both to the sight and
touch; and the whole appearance together of figure, and light or colour,
is by the Greeks commonly called εἴδος, and εἴδωλον, and ἱδέα; and by
the Latins, _species_ and _imago_; all which names signify no more but
appearance.

The phantasm, which is made by hearing, is sound; by smell, odour; by
taste, savour; and by touch, hardness and softness, heat and cold,
wetness, oiliness, and many more, which are easier to be distinguished
by sense than words. Smoothness, roughness, rarity, and density, refer
to figure, and are therefore common both to touch and sight. And as for
the objects of hearing, smell, taste, and touch, they are not sound,
odour, savour, hardness, &c., but the bodies themselves from which
sound, odour, savour, hardness, &c. proceed; of the causes of which, and
of the manner how they are produced, I shall speak hereafter.

But these phantasms, though they be effects in the sentient, as subject,
produced by objects working upon the organs; yet there are also other
effects besides these, produced by the same objects in the same organs;
namely certain motions proceeding from sense, which are called _animal
motions_. For seeing in all sense of external things there is mutual
action and reaction, that is, two endeavours opposing one another, it is
manifest that the motion of both of them together will be continued
every way, especially to the confines of both the bodies. And when this
happens in the internal organ, the endeavour outwards will proceed in a
solid angle, which will be greater, and consequently the idea greater,
than it would have been if the impression had been weaker.

[Sidenote: The magnitude of images, how and by what it is determined.]

11. From hence the natural cause is manifest, first, why those things
seem to be greater, which, _cæteris paribus_, are seen in a greater
angle: secondly, why in a serene cold night, when the moon doth not
shine, more of the fixed stars appear than at another time. For their
action is less hindered by the serenity of the air, and not obscured by
the greater light of the moon, which is then absent; and the cold,
making the air more pressing, helpeth or strengtheneth the action of the
stars upon our eyes; in so much as stars may then be seen which are seen
at no other time. And this may suffice to be said in general concerning
sense made by the reaction of the organ. For, as for the place of the
image, the deceptions of sight, and other things of which we have
experience in ourselves by sense, seeing they depend for the most part
upon the fabric itself of the eye of man, I shall speak of them then
when I come to speak of man.

[Sidenote: Pleasure, pain, appetite, and aversion, what they are.]

12. But there is another kind of sense, of which I will say something in
this place, namely, the sense of pleasure and pain, proceeding not from
the reaction of the heart outwards, but from continual action from the
outermost part of the organ towards the heart. For the original of life
being in the heart, that motion in the sentient, which is propagated to
the heart, must necessarily make some alteration or diversion of vital
motion, namely, by quickening or slackening, helping or hindering the
same. Now when it helpeth, it is pleasure; and when it hindereth, it is
pain, trouble, grief, &c. And as phantasms seem to be without, by reason
of the endeavour outwards, so pleasure and pain, by reason of the
endeavour of the organ inwards, seem to be within; namely, there where
the first cause of the pleasure or pain is; as when the pain proceeds
from a wound, we think the pain and the wound are both in the same
place.

[Sidenote: Pleasure, pain, appetite, and aversion, what they are.]

Now vital motion is the motion of the blood, perpetually circulating (as
hath been shown from many infallible signs and marks by Doctor Harvey,
the first observer of it) in the veins and arteries. Which motion, when
it is hindered by some other motion made by the action of sensible
objects, may be restored again either by bending or setting strait the
parts of the body; which is done when the spirits are carried now into
these, now into other nerves, till the pain, as far as is possible, be
quite taken away. But if vital motion be helped by motion made by sense,
then the parts of the organ will be disposed to guide the spirits in
such manner as conduceth most to the preservation and augmentation of
that motion, by the help of the nerves. And in animal motion this is the
very first endeavour, and found even in the embryo; which while it is in
the womb, moveth its limbs with voluntary motion, for the avoiding of
whatsoever troubleth it, or for the pursuing of what pleaseth it. And
this first endeavour, when it tends towards such things as are known by
experience to be pleasant, is called _appetite_, that is, an
approaching; and when it shuns what is troublesome, _aversion_, or
flying from it. And little infants, at the beginning and as soon as they
are born, have appetite to very few things, as also they avoid very few,
by reason of their want of experience and memory; and therefore they
have not so great a variety of animal motion as we see in those that are
more grown. For it is not possible, without such knowledge as is derived
from sense, that is, without experience and memory, to know what will
prove pleasant or hurtful; only there is some place for conjecture from
the looks or aspects of things. And hence it is, that though they do not
know what may do them good or harm, yet sometimes they approach and
sometimes retire from the same thing, as their doubt prompts them. But
afterwards, by accustoming themselves by little and little, they come to
know readily what is to be pursued and what to be avoided; and also to
have a ready use of their nerves and other organs, in the pursuing and
avoiding of good and bad. Wherefore appetite and aversion are the first
endeavours of animal motion.

Consequent to this first endeavour, is the impulsion into the nerves and
retraction again of animal spirits, of which it is necessary there be
some receptacle or place near the original of the nerves; and this
motion or endeavour is followed by a swelling and relaxation of the
muscles; and lastly, these are followed by contraction and extension of
the limbs, which is animal motion.

[Sidenote: Deliberation and will, what.]

13. The considerations of appetites and aversions are divers. For seeing
living creatures have sometimes appetite and sometimes aversion to the
same thing, as they think it will either be for their good or their
hurt; while that vicissitude of appetites and aversions remains in them,
they have that series of thoughts which is called _deliberation_; which
lasteth as long as they have it in their power to obtain that which
pleaseth, or to avoid that which displeaseth them. Appetite, therefore,
and aversion are simply so called as long as they follow not
deliberation. But if deliberation have gone before, then the last act of
it, if it be appetite, is called _will_; if aversion, _unwillingness_.
So that the same thing is called both will and appetite; but the
consideration of them, namely, before and after deliberation, is divers.
Nor is that which is done within a man whilst he willeth any thing,
different from that which is done in other living creatures, whilst,
deliberation having preceded, they have appetite.

Neither is the freedom of willing or not willing, greater in man, than
in other living creatures. For where there is appetite, the entire cause
of appetite hath preceded; and, consequently, the act of appetite could
not choose but follow, that is, hath of necessity followed (as is shown
in chapter IX, article 5). And therefore such a liberty as is free from
necessity, is not to be found in the will either of men or beasts. But
if by liberty we understand the faculty or power, not of willing, but of
doing what they will, then certainly that liberty is to be allowed to
both, and both may equally have it, whensoever it is to be had.

Again, when appetite and aversion do with celerity succeed one another,
the whole series made by them hath its name sometimes from one,
sometimes from the other. For the same deliberation, whilst it inclines
sometimes to one, sometimes to the other, is from appetite called
_hope_, and from aversion, _fear_. For where there is no hope, it is not
to be called fear, but _hate_; and where no fear, not hope, but
_desire_. To conclude, all the passions, called passions of the mind,
consist of appetite and aversion, except pure pleasure and pain, which
are a certain fruition of good or evil; as anger is aversion from some
imminent evil, but such as is joined with appetite of avoiding that evil
by force. But because the passions and perturbations of the mind are
innumerable, and many of them not to be discerned in any creatures
besides men; I will speak of them more at large in that section which is
concerning _man_. As for those objects, if there be any such, which do
not at all stir the mind, we are said to contemn them.

And thus much of sense in general. In the next place I shall speak of
sensible objects.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXVI.

                     OF THE WORLD AND OF THE STARS.

1. The magnitude and duration of the world, inscrutable.—2. No place in
    the world empty.—3. The arguments of Lucretius for vacuum,
    invalid.—4. Other arguments for the establishing of vacuum,
    invalid.—5. Six suppositions for the salving of the phenomena of
    nature.—6. Possible causes of the motions annual and diurnal; and of
    the apparent direction, station, and retrogradation of the
    planets.—7. The supposition of simple motion, why likely.—8. The
    cause of the eccentricity of the annual motion of the earth.—9. The
    cause why the moon hath always one and the same face turned towards
    the earth.—10. The cause of the tides of the ocean.—11. The cause of
    the precession of the equinoxes.


[Sidenote: The magnitude and duration of the world, inscrutable.]

1. Consequent to the contemplation of sense is the contemplation of
bodies, which are the efficient causes or objects of sense. Now every
object is either a part of the whole world, or an aggregate of parts.
The greatest of all bodies, or sensible objects, is the world itself;
which we behold when we look round about us from this point of the same
which we call the earth. Concerning the world, as it is one aggregate of
many parts, the things that fall under inquiry are but few; and those we
can determine, none. Of the whole world we may inquire what is its
magnitude, what its duration, and how many there be, but nothing else.
For as for place and time, that is to say, magnitude and duration, they
are only our own fancy of a body simply so called, that is to say, of a
body indefinitely taken, as I have shown before in chapter VII. All
other phantasms are of bodies or objects, as they are distinguished from
one another; as colour, the phantasm of coloured bodies; sound, of
bodies that move the sense of hearing, &c. The questions concerning the
magnitude of the world are whether it be finite or infinite, full or not
full; concerning its duration, whether it had a beginning, or be
eternal; and concerning the number, whether there be one or many; though
as concerning the number, if it were of infinite magnitude, there could
be no controversy at all. Also if it had a beginning, then by what cause
and of what matter it was made; and again, from whence that cause and
that matter had their being, will be new questions; till at last we come
to one or many eternal cause or causes. And the determination of all
these things belongeth to him that professeth the universal doctrine of
philosophy, in case as much could be known as can be sought. But the
knowledge of what is infinite can never be attained by a finite
inquirer. Whatsoever we know that are men, we learn it from our
phantasms; and of infinite, whether magnitude or time, there is no
phantasm at all; so that it is impossible either for a man or any other
creature to have any conception of infinite. And though a man may from
some effect proceed to the immediate cause thereof, and from that to a
more remote cause, and so ascend continually by right ratiocination from
cause to cause; yet he will not be able to proceed eternally, but
wearied will at last give over, without knowing whether it were possible
for him to proceed to an end or not. But whether we suppose the world to
be finite or infinite, no absurdity will follow. For the same things
which now appear, might appear, whether the Creator had pleased it
should be finite or infinite. Besides, though from this, that nothing
can move itself, it may rightly be inferred that there was some first
eternal movent; yet it can never be inferred, though some used to make
such inference, that that movent was eternally immoveable, but rather
eternally moved. For as it is true, that nothing is moved by itself; so
it is true also that nothing is moved but by that which is already
moved. The questions therefore about the magnitude and beginning of the
world, are not to be determined by philosophers, but by those that are
lawfully authorized to order the worship of God. For as Almighty God,
when he had brought his people into Judæa, allowed the priests the first
fruits reserved to himself; so when he had delivered up the world to the
disputations of men, it was his pleasure that all opinions concerning
the nature of infinite and eternal, known only to himself, should, as
the first fruits of wisdom, be judged by those whose ministry he meant
to use in the ordering of religion. I cannot therefore commend those
that boast they have demonstrated, by reasons drawn from natural things,
that the world had a beginning. They are contemned by idiots, because
they understand them not; and by the learned, because they understand
them; by both deservedly. For who can commend him that demonstrates
thus? "If the world be eternal, then an infinite number of days, or
other measures of time, preceded the birth of Abraham. But the birth of
Abraham preceded the birth of Isaac; and therefore one infinite is
greater than another infinite, or one eternal than another eternal;
which," he says, "is absurd." This demonstration is like his, who from
this, that the number of even numbers is infinite, would conclude that
there are as many even numbers as there are numbers simply, that is to
say, the even numbers are as many as all the even and odd together.
They, which in this manner take away eternity from the world, do they
not by the same means take away eternity from the Creator of the world?
From this absurdity therefore they run into another, being forced to
call eternity _nunc stans_, a standing still of the present time, or an
abiding now; and, which is much more absurd, to give to the infinite
number of numbers the name of unity. But why should eternity be called
an abiding now, rather than an abiding then? Wherefore there must either
be many eternities, or _now_ and _then_ must signify the same. With such
demonstrators as these, that speak in another language, it is impossible
to enter into disputation. And the men, that reason thus absurdly, are
not idiots, but, which makes the absurdity unpardonable, geometricians,
and such as take upon them to be judges, impertinent, but severe judges
of other men's demonstrations. The reason is this, that as soon as they
are entangled in the words _infinite_ and _eternal_, of which we have in
our mind no idea, but that of our own insufficiency to comprehend them,
they are forced either to speak something absurd, or, which they love
worse, to hold their peace. For geometry hath in it somewhat like wine,
which, when new, is windy; but afterwards though less pleasant, yet more
wholesome. Whatsoever therefore is true, young geometricians think
demonstrable; but elder not. Wherefore I purposely pass over the
questions of infinite and eternal; contenting myself with that doctrine
concerning the beginning and magnitude of the world, which I have been
persuaded to by the holy Scriptures and fame of the miracles which
confirm them; and by the custom of my country, and reverence due to the
laws. And so I pass on to such things as it is not unlawful to dispute
of.

[Sidenote: No place in the world empty.]

2. Concerning the world it is further questioned, whether the parts
thereof be contiguous to one another, in such manner as not to admit of
the least empty space between; and the disputation both for and against
it is carried on with probability enough. For the taking away of vacuum,
I will instance in only one experiment, a common one, but I think
unanswerable.

Let A B (in fig. 1) represent a vessel, such as gardeners use to water
their gardens withal; whose bottom B is full of little holes; and whose
mouth A may be stopped with one's finger, when there shall be need. If
now this vessel be filled with water, the hole at the top A being
stopped, the water will not flow out at any of the holes in the bottom
B. But if the finger be removed to let in the air above, it will run out
at them all; and as; soon as the finger is applied to it again, the
water will suddenly and totally be stayed again from running out. The
cause whereof seems to be no other but this, that the water cannot by
its natural endeavour to descend drive down the air below it, because
there is no place for it to go into, unless either by thrusting away the
next contiguous air, it proceed by continual endeavour to the hole A,
where it may enter and succeed into the place of the water that floweth
out, or else, by resisting the endeavour of the water downwards,
penetrate the same and pass up through it. By the first of these ways,
while the hole at A remains stopped, there is no possible passage; nor
by the second, unless the holes be so great that the water, flowing out
at them, can by its own weight force the air at the same time to ascend
into the vessel by the same holes: as we see it does in a vessel whose
mouth is wide enough, when we turn suddenly the bottom upwards to pour
out the water; for then the air being forced by the weight of the water,
enters, as is evident by the sobbing and resistance of the water, at the
sides or circumference of the orifice. And this I take for a sign that
all space is full; for without this, the natural motion of the water,
which is a heavy body, downwards, would not be hindered.

[Sidenote: The arguments of Lucretius for vacuum invalid.]

3. On the contrary, for the establishing of vacuum, many and specious
arguments and experiments have been brought. Nevertheless there seems to
be something wanting in all of them to conclude it firmly. These
arguments for vacuum are partly made by the followers of the doctrine of
Epicurus; who taught that the world consists of very small spaces not
filled by any body, and of very small bodies that have within them no
empty space, which by reason of their hardness he calls _atoms_; and
that these small bodies and spaces are every where intermingled. Their
arguments are thus delivered by Lucretius.

And first he says, that unless it were so, there could be no motion. For
the office and property of bodies is to withstand and hinder motion. If,
therefore, the universe were filled with body, motion would everywhere
be hindered, so as to have no beginning anywhere; and consequently there
would be no motion at all. It is true that in whatsoever is full and at
rest in all its parts, it is not possible motion should have beginning.
But nothing is drawn from hence for the proving of vacuum. For though it
should be granted that there is vacuum, yet if the bodies which are
intermingled with it, should all at once and together be at rest, they
would never be moved again. For it has been demonstrated above, in chap.
IX, art. 7, that nothing can be moved but by that which is contiguous
and already moved. But supposing that all things are at rest together,
there can be nothing contiguous and moved, and therefore no beginning of
motion. Now the denying of the beginning of motion, doth not take away
present motion, unless beginning be taken away from body also. For
motion may be either co-eternal, or concreated with body. Nor doth it
seem more necessary that bodies were first at rest, and afterwards
moved, than that they were first moved, and rested, if ever they rested
at all, afterwards. Neither doth there appear any cause, why the matter
of the world should, for the admission of motion, be intermingled with
empty spaces rather than full; I say full, but withal fluid. Nor,
lastly, is there any reason why those hard atoms may not also, by the
motion of intermingled fluid matter, be congregated and brought together
into compounded bodies of such bigness as we see. Wherefore nothing can
by this argument be concluded, but that motion was either coeternal, or
of the same duration with that which is moved; neither of which
conclusions consisteth with the doctrine of Epicurus, who allows neither
to the world nor to motion any beginning at all. The necessity,
therefore, of vacuum is not hitherto demonstrated. And the cause, as far
as I understand from them that have discoursed with me of vacuum, is
this, that whilst they contemplate the nature of fluid, they conceive it
to consist, as it were, of small grains of hard matter, in such manner
as meal is fluid, made so by grinding of the corn; when nevertheless it
is possible to conceive fluid to be of its own nature as homogeneous as
either an atom, or as vacuum itself.

The second of their arguments is taken from weight, and is contained in
these verses of Lucretius:

          Corporis officium est quoniam premere omnia deorsum;
          Contra autem natura manet sine pondere inanis;
          Ergo, quod magnum est æque, leviusque videtur,
          Nimirum plus esse sibi declarat inanis.--I. 363-66.

That is to say, _seeing the office and property of body is to press all
things downwards; and on the contrary, seeing the nature of vacuum is to
have no weight at all; therefore when of two bodies of equal magnitude,
one is lighter than the other, it is manifest that the lighter body hath
in it more vacuum than the other_.

To say nothing of the assumption concerning the endeavour of bodies
downwards, which is not rightly assumed, because the world hath nothing
to do with downwards, which is a mere fiction of ours; nor of this, that
if all things tended to the same lowest part of the world, either there
would be no coalescence at all of bodies, or they would all be gathered
together into the same place: this only is sufficient to take away the
force of the argument, that air, intermingled with those his atoms, had
served as well for his purpose as his intermingled vacuum.

The third argument is drawn from this, that lightning, sound, heat and
cold, do penetrate all bodies, except atoms, how solid soever they be.
But this reason, except it be first demonstrated that the same things
cannot happen without vacuum by perpetual generation of motion, is
altogether invalid. But that all the same things may so happen, shall in
due place be demonstrated.

Lastly, the fourth argument is set down by the same Lucretius in these
verses:

           Duo de concursu corpora lata
       Si cita dissiliant, nempe aer omne necesse est,
       Inter corpora quod fuerat, possidat inane.
       Is porro quamvis circum celerantibus auris
       Confluat, haud poterit tamen uno tempore totum
       Compleri spatium; nam primum quemque necesse est
       Occupet ille locum, deinde omnia possideantur.--I. 385-91.

That is, _if two flat bodies be suddenly pulled asunder, of necessity
the air must come between them to fill up the space they left empty. But
with what celerity soever the air flow in, yet it cannot in one instant
of time fill the whole space, but first one part of it, then
successively all_. Which nevertheless is more repugnant to the opinion
of Epicurus, than of those that deny vacuum. For though it be true, that
if two bodies were of infinite hardness, and were joined together by
their superficies which were most exactly plane, it would be impossible
to pull them asunder, in regard it could not be done but by motion in an
instant; yet, if as the greatest of all magnitudes cannot be given, nor
the swiftest of all motions, so neither the hardest of all bodies; it
might be, that by the application of very great force, there might be
place made for a successive flowing in of the air, namely, by separating
the parts of the joined bodies by succession, beginning at the outermost
and ending at the innermost part. He ought, therefore, first to have
proved, that there are some bodies extremely hard, not relatively as
compared with softer bodies, but absolutely, that is to say, infinitely
hard; which is not true. But if we suppose, as Epicurus doth, that atoms
are indivisible, and yet have small superficies of their own; then if
two bodies should be joined together by many, or but one only small
superficies of either of them, then I say this argument of Lucretius
would be a firm demonstration, that no two bodies made up of atoms, as
he supposes, could ever possibly be pulled asunder by any force
whatsoever. But this is repugnant to daily experience.

[Sidenote: Other arguments for the establishing of vacuum, invalid.]

4. And thus much of the arguments of Lucretius. Let us now consider the
arguments which are drawn from the experiments of later writers.

I. The first experiment is this: that if a hollow vessel be thrust into
water with the bottom upwards, the water will ascend into it; which they
say it could not do, unless the air within were thrust together into a
narrower place; and that this were also impossible, except there were
little empty places in the air. Also, that when the air is compressed to
a certain degree, it can receive no further compression, its small
particles not suffering themselves to be pent into less room. This
reason, if the air could not pass through the water as it ascends within
the vessel, might seem valid. But it is sufficiently known, that air
will penetrate water by the application of a force equal to the gravity
of the water. If therefore the force, by which the vessel is thrust
down, be greater or equal to the endeavour by which the water naturally
tendeth downwards, the air will go out that way where the resistance is
made, namely, towards the edges of the vessel. For, by how much the
deeper is the water which is to be penetrated, so much greater must be
the depressing force. But after the vessel is quite under water, the
force by which it is depressed, that is to say, the force by which the
water riseth up, is no longer increased. There is therefore such an
equilibration between them, as that the natural endeavour of the water
downwards is equal to the endeavour by which the same water is to be
penetrated to the increased depth.

II. The second experiment is, that if a concave cylinder of sufficient
length, made of glass, that the experiment may be the better seen,
having one end open and the other close shut, be filled with
quicksilver, and the open end being stopped with one's finger, be
together with the finger dipped into a dish or other vessel, in which
also there is quicksilver, and the cylinder be set upright, we shall,
the finger being taken away to make way for the descent of the
quicksilver, see it descend into the vessel under it, till there be only
so much remaining within the cylinder as may fill about twenty-six
inches of the same; and thus it will always happen whatsoever be the
cylinder, provided that the length be not less than twenty-six inches.
From whence they conclude that the cavity of the cylinder above the
quicksilver remains empty of all body. But in this experiment I find no
necessity at all of vacuum. For when the quicksilver which is in the
cylinder descends, the vessel under it must needs be filled to a greater
height, and consequently so much of the contiguous air must be thrust
away as may make place for the quicksilver which is descended. Now if it
be asked whither that air goes, what can be answered but this, that it
thrusteth away the next air, and that the next, and so successively,
till there be a return to the place where the propulsion first began.
And there, the last air thus thrust on will press the quicksilver in the
vessel with the same force with which the first air was thrust away; and
if the force with which the quicksilver descends be great enough, which
is greater or less as it descends from a place of greater or less
height, it will make the air penetrate the quicksilver in the vessel,
and go up into the cylinder to fill the place which they thought was
left empty. But because the quicksilver hath not in every degree of
height force enough to cause such penetration, therefore in descending
it must of necessity stay somewhere, namely, there, where its endeavour
downwards, and the resistance of the same to the penetration of the air,
come to an equilibrium. And by this experiment it is manifest, that this
equilibrium will be at the height of twenty-six inches, or thereabouts.

III. The third experiment is, that when a vessel hath as much air in it
as it can naturally contain, there may nevertheless be forced into it as
much water as will fill three quarters of the same vessel. And the
experiment is made in this manner. Into the glass bottle, represented
(in figure 2) by the sphere F G, whose centre is A, let the pipe B A C
be so fitted, that it may precisely fill the mouth of the bottle; and
let the end B be so near the bottom, that there may be only space enough
left for the free passage of the water which is thrust in above. Let the
upper end of this pipe have a cover at D, with a spout at E, by which
the water, when it ascends in the pipe, may run out. Also let H C be a
cock, for the opening or shutting of the passage of the water between B
and D, as there shall be occasion. Let the cover D E be taken off, and
the cock H C being opened, let a syringe full of water be forced in; and
before the syringe be taken away, let the cock be turned to hinder the
going out of the air. And in this manner let the injection of water be
repeated as often as it shall be requisite, till the water rise within
the bottle; for example, to G F. Lastly, the cover being fastened on
again, and the cock H C opened, the water will run swiftly out at E, and
sink by little and little from G F to the bottom of the pipe B.

From this phenomenon, they argue for the necessity of vacuum in this
manner. The bottle, from the beginning, was full of air; which air could
neither go out by penetrating so great a length of water as was injected
by the pipe, nor by any other way. Of necessity, therefore, all the
water as high as F G, as also all the air that was in the bottle before
the water was forced in, must now be in the same place, which at first
was filled by the air alone; which were impossible, if all the space
within the bottle were formerly filled with air precisely, that is,
without any vacuum. Besides, though some man perhaps may think the air,
being a thin body, may pass through the body of the water contained in
the pipe, yet from that other phenomenon, namely, that all the water
which is in the space B F G is cast out again by the spout at E, for
which it seems impossible that any other reason can be given besides the
force by which the air frees itself from compression, it follows, that
either there was in the bottle some space empty, or that many bodies may
be together in the same place. But this last is absurd; and therefore
the former is true, namely, that there was vacuum.

This argument is infirm in two places. For first, that is assumed which
is not to be granted; and in the second place, an experiment is brought,
which I think is repugnant to vacuum. That which is assumed is, that the
air can have no passage out through the pipe. Nevertheless, we see daily
that air easily ascends from the bottom to the superficies of a river,
as is manifest by the bubbles that rise; nor doth it need any other
cause to give it this motion, than the natural endeavour downwards of
the water. Why, therefore, may not the endeavour upwards of the same
water, acquired by the injection, which endeavour upwards is greater
than the natural endeavour of the water downwards, cause the air in the
bottle to penetrate in like manner the water that presseth it downwards;
especially, seeing the water, as it riseth in the bottle, doth so press
the air that is above it, as that it generateth in every part thereof an
endeavour towards the external superficies of the pipe, and consequently
maketh all the parts of the enclosed air to tend directly towards the
passage at B? I say, this is no less manifest, than that the air which
riseth up from the bottom of a river should penetrate the water, how
deep soever it be. Wherefore I do not yet see any cause why the force,
by which the water is injected, should not at the same time eject the
air.

And as for their arguing the necessity of vacuum from the rejection of
the water; in the first place, supposing there is vacuum, I demand by
what principle of motion that ejection is made. Certainly, seeing this
motion is from within outwards, it must needs be caused by some agent
within the bottle; that is to say, by the air itself. Now the motion of
that air, being caused by the rising of the water, begins at the bottom,
and tends upwards; whereas the motion by which it ejecteth the water
ought to begin above, and tend downwards. From whence therefore hath the
enclosed air this endeavour towards the bottom? To this question I know
not what answer can be given, unless it be said, that the air descends
of its own accord to expel the water. Which, because it is absurd, and
that the air, after the water is forced in, hath as much room as its
magnitude requires, there will remain no cause at all why the water
should be forced out. Wherefore the assertion of vacuum is repugnant to
the very experiment which is here brought to establish it.

Many other phenomena are usually brought for vacuum, as those of
_weather-glasses_, _æolipyles_, _wind-guns_, &c. which would all be very
hard to be salved, unless water be penetrable by air, without the
intermixture of empty space. But now, seeing air may with no great
endeavour pass through not only water, but any other fluid body though
never so stubborn, as quicksilver, these phenomena prove nothing.
Nevertheless, it might in reason be expected, that he that would take
away vacuum, should without vacuum show us such causes of these
phenomena, as should be at least of equal, if not greater probability.
This therefore shall be done in the following discourse, when I come to
speak of these phenomena in their proper places. But first, the most
general hypotheses of natural philosophy are to be premised.

And seeing that suppositions are put for the true causes of apparent
effects, every supposition, except such as be absurd, must of necessity
consist of some supposed possible motion; for rest can never be the
efficient cause of anything; and motion supposeth bodies moveable; of
which there are three kinds, _fluid_, _consistent_, and _mixed of both_.
_Fluid_ are those, whose parts may by very weak endeavour be separated
from one another; and _consistent_ those for the separation of whose
parts greater force is to be applied. There are therefore degrees of
consistency; which degrees, by comparison with more or less consistent,
have the names of _hardness_ or _softness_. Wherefore a fluid body is
always divisible into bodies equally fluid, as quantity into quantities;
and soft bodies, of whatsoever degree of softness, into soft bodies of
the same degree. And though many men seem to conceive no other
difference of _fluidity_, but such as ariseth from the different
magnitudes of the parts, in which sense dust, though of diamonds, may be
called fluid; yet I understand by _fluidity_, that which is made such by
nature equally in every part of the fluid body; not as dust is fluid,
for so a house which is falling in pieces may be called fluid; but in
such manner as water seems fluid, and to divide itself into parts
perpetually fluid. And this being well understood, I come to my
suppositions.

[Sidenote: Six suppositions for the salving of the phenomena of nature.]

5. First, therefore, I suppose that the immense space, which we call the
world, is the aggregate of all bodies which are either consistent and
visible, as the earth and the stars; or invisible, as the small atoms
which are disseminated through the whole space between the earth and the
stars; and lastly, that most fluid ether, which so fills all the rest of
the universe, as that it leaves in it no empty place at all.

Secondly, I suppose with Copernicus, that the greater bodies of the
world, which are both consistent and permanent, have such order amongst
themselves, as that the sun hath the first place, Mercury the second,
Venus the third, the Earth with the moon going about it the fourth, Mars
the fifth, Jupiter with his attendants the sixth, Saturn the seventh;
and after these, the fixed stars have their several distances from the
sun.

Thirdly, I suppose that in the sun and the rest of the planets there is
and always has been a simple circular motion.

Fourthly, I suppose that in the body of the air there are certain other
bodies intermingled, which are not fluid; but withal that they are so
small, that they are not perceptible by sense; and that these also have
their proper simple motion, and are some of them more, some less hard or
consistent.

Fifthly, I suppose with Kepler that as the distance between the sun and
the earth is to the distance between the moon and the earth, so the
distance between the moon and the earth is to the semidiameter of the
earth.

As for the magnitude of the circles, and the times in which they are
described by the bodies which are in them, I will suppose them to be
such as shall seem most agreeable to the phenomena in question.

[Sidenote: Possible causes of the motions annual and diurnal; and of the
           apparent direction, station, and retrogradation of the
           planets.]

6. The causes of the different seasons of the year, and of the several
variations of days and nights in all the parts of the superficies of the
earth, have been demonstrated, first by Copernicus, and since by Kepler,
Galileus, and others, from the supposition of the earth's diurnal
revolution about its own axis, together with its annual motion about the
sun in the ecliptic according to the order of the signs; and thirdly, by
the annual revolution of the same earth about its own centre, contrary
to the order of the signs. I suppose with Copernicus, that the diurnal
revolution is from the motion of the earth, by which the equinoctial
circle is described about it. And as for the other two annual motions,
they are the efficient cause of the earth's being carried about in the
ecliptic in such manner, as that its axis is always kept parallel to
itself. Which parallelism was for this reason introduced, lest by the
earth's annual revolution its poles should seem to be necessarily
carried about the sun, contrary to experience. I have, in art. 10, chap.
XXI, demonstrated, from the supposition of simple circular motion in the
sun, that the earth is so carried about the sun, as that its axis is
thereby kept always parallel to itself. Wherefore, from these two
supposed motions in the sun, the one simple circular motion, the other
circular motion about its own centre, it may be demonstrated that the
year hath both the same variations of days and nights, as have been
demonstrated by Copernicus.

For if the circle _a b c d_ (in fig. 3) be the ecliptic, whose centre is
_e_, and diameter _a e c_; and the earth be placed in _a_, and the sun
be moved in the little circle _f g h i_, namely, according to the order
_f_, _g_, _h_, and _i_, it hath been demonstrated, that a body placed in
_a_ will be moved in the same order through the points of the ecliptic
_a_, _b_, _c_, and _d_, and will always keep its axis parallel to
itself.

But if, as I have supposed, the earth also be moved with simple circular
motion in a plane that passeth through _a_, cutting the plane of the
ecliptic so as that the common section of both the planes be in _a c_,
thus also the axis of the earth will be kept always parallel to itself.
For let the centre of the earth be moved about in the circumference of
the epicycle, whose diameter is _l a k_, which is a part of the strait
line _l a c_; therefore _l a k_, the diameter of the epicycle, passing
through the centre of the earth, will be in the plane of the ecliptic.
Wherefore seeing that by reason of the earth's simple motion both in the
ecliptic and in its epicycle, the strait line _l a k_ is kept always
parallel to itself, every other strait line also taken in the body of
the earth, and consequently its axis, will in like manner be kept always
parallel to itself; so that in what part soever of the ecliptic the
centre of the epicycle be found, and in what part soever of the epicycle
the centre of the earth be found at the same time, the axis of the earth
will be parallel to the place where the same axis would have been, if
the centre of the earth had never gone out of the ecliptic.

Now as I have demonstrated the simple annual motion of the earth from
the supposition of simple motion in the sun; so from the supposition of
simple motion in the earth may be demonstrated the monthly simple motion
of the moon. For if the names be but changed, the demonstration will be
the same, and therefore need not be repeated.

[Sidenote: The supposition of simple motion, why likely.]

7. That which makes this supposition of the sun's simple motion in the
epicycle _f g h i_ probable, is first, that the periods of all the
planets are not only described about the sun, but so described, as that
they are all contained within the zodiac, that is to say, within the
latitude of about sixteen degrees; for the cause of this seems to depend
upon some power in the sun, especially in that part of the sun which
respects the zodiac. Secondly, that in the whole compass of the heavens
there appears no other body from which the cause of this phenomenon can
in probability be derived. Besides, I could not imagine that so many and
such various motions of the planets should have no dependance at all
upon one another. But, by supposing motive power in the sun, we suppose
motion also; for power to move without motion is no power at all. I have
therefore supposed that there is in the sun for the governing of the
primary planets, and in the earth for the governing of the moon, such
motion, as being received by the primary planets and by the moon, makes
them necessarily appear to us in such manner as we see them. Whereas,
that circular motion, which is commonly attributed to them, about a
fixed axis, which is called conversion, being a motion of their parts
only, and not of their whole bodies, is insufficient to salve their
appearances. For seeing whatsoever is so moved, hath no endeavour at all
towards those parts which are without the circle, they have no power to
propagate any endeavour to such bodies as are placed without it. And as
for them that suppose this may be done by magnetical virtue, or by
incorporeal and immaterial species, they suppose no natural cause; nay,
no cause at all. For there is no such thing as an incorporeal movent,
and magnetical virtue is a thing altogether unknown; and whensoever it
shall be known, it will be found to be a motion of body. It remains,
therefore, that if the primary planets be carried about by the sun, and
the moon by the earth, they have the simple circular motions of the sun
and the earth for the causes of their circulations. Otherwise, if they
be not carried about by the sun and the earth, but that every planet
hath been moved, as it is now moved, ever since it was made, there will
be of their motions no cause natural. For either these motions were
concreated with their bodies, and their cause is supernatural; or they
are coeternal with them, and so they have no cause at all. For
whatsoever is eternal was never generated.

I may add besides, to confirm the probability of this simple motion,
that as almost all learned men are now of the same opinion with
Copernicus concerning the parallelism of the axis of the earth, it
seemed to me to be more agreeable to truth, or at least more handsome,
that it should be caused by simple circular motion alone, than by two
motions, one in the ecliptic, and the other about the earth's own axis
the contrary way, neither of them simple, nor either of them such as
might be produced by any motion of the sun. I thought best therefore to
retain this hypothesis of simple motion, and from it to derive the
causes of as many of the phenomena as I could, and to let such alone as
I could not deduce from thence.

It will perhaps be objected, that although by this supposition the
reason may be given of the parallelism of the axis of the earth, and of
many other appearances, nevertheless, seeing it is done by placing the
body of the sun in the centre of that orb which the earth describes with
its annual motion, the supposition itself is false; because this annual
orb is eccentric to the sun. In the first place, therefore, let us
examine what that eccentricity is, and whence it proceeds.

[Sidenote: The cause of the eccentricity of the annual motion of the
           earth.]

8. Let the annual circle of the earth _a b c d_ (in fig. 3) be divided
into four equal parts by the strait lines _a c_ and _b d_, cutting one
another in the centre _e_; and let _a_ be the beginning of Libra, _b_ of
Capricorn, _c_ of Aries and _d_ of Cancer; and let the whole orb _a b c
d_ be understood, according to Copernicus, to have every way so great
distance from the zodiac of the fixed stars, that it be in comparison
with it but as a point. Let the earth be now supposed to be in the
beginning of Libra at _a_. The sun, therefore, will appear in the
beginning of Aries at _c_. Wherefore, if the earth be moved from _a_ to
_b_, the apparent motion of the sun will be from _c_ to the beginning of
Cancer in _d_; and the earth being moved forwards from _b_ to _c_, the
sun also will appear to be moved forwards to the beginning of Libra in
_a_; wherefore _c d a_ will be the summer arch, and the winter arch will
be _a b c_. Now, in the time, of the sun's apparent motion in the summer
arch, there are numbered 186¾ days; and, consequently, the earth makes
in the same time the same number of diurnal conversions in the arch _a b
c_; and, therefore, the earth in its motion through the arch _c d a_
will make only 178½ diurnal conversions. Wherefore the arch _a b c_
ought to be greater than the arch _c d a_ by 8¼ days, that is to say, by
almost so many degrees. Let the arch _a r_, as also _c s_, be each of
them an arch of two degrees and 1⁄16. Wherefore the arch _r b s_ will be
greater than the semicircle _a b c_ by 4⅛ degrees, and greater than the
arch _s d r_ by 8¼ degrees. The equinoxes, therefore, will be in the
points _r_ and _s_; and therefore also, when the earth is in _r_, the
sun will appear in _s_. Wherefore the true place of the sun will be in
_t_, that is to say, without the centre of the earth's annual motion by
the quantity of the sine of the arch _a r_, or the sine of two degrees
and 16 minutes. Now this sine, putting 100,000 for the radius, will be
near 3580 parts thereof. And so much is the eccentricity of the earth's
annual motion, provided that that motion be in a perfect circle; and _s_
and _r_ are the equinoctial parts. And the strait lines _s r_ and _c a_,
produced both ways till they reach the zodiac of the fixed stars, will
fall still upon the same fixed stars; because the whole orb _a b c d_ is
supposed to have no magnitude at all in respect of the great distance of
the fixed stars.

Supposing now the sun to be in _c_, it remains that I show the cause why
the earth is nearer to the sun, when in its annual motion it is found to
be in _d_, than when it is in _b_. And I take the cause to be this. When
the earth is in the beginning of Capricorn at _b_, the sun appears in
the beginning of Cancer at _d_; and then is the midst of summer. But in
the midst of summer, the northern parts of the earth are towards the
sun, which is almost all dry land, containing all Europe and much the
greatest part of Asia and America. But when the earth is in the
beginning of Cancer at _d_, it is the midst of winter, and that part of
the earth is towards the sun, which contains those great seas called the
South Sea and the Indian Sea, which are of far greater extent than all
the dry land in that hemisphere. Wherefore by the last article of
chapter XXI, when the earth is in _d_, it will come nearer to its first
movent, that is, to the sun which is in _t_; that is to say, the earth
is nearer to the sun in the midst of winter when it is in _d_, than in
the midst of summer when it is in _b_; and, therefore, during the winter
the sun is in its _Perigæum_, and in its _Apogæum_ during the summer.
And thus I have shown a possible cause of the eccentricity of the earth;
which was to be done.

I am, therefore, of Kepler's opinion in this, that he attributes the
eccentricity of the earth to the difference of the parts thereof, and
supposes one part to be affected, and another disaffected to the sun.
And I dissent from him in this, that he thinks it to be by magnetic
virtue, and that this magnetic virtue or attraction and thrusting back
of the earth is wrought by immateriate species; which cannot be, because
nothing can give motion but a body moved and contiguous. For if those
bodies be not moved which are contiguous to a body unmoved, how this
body should begin to be moved is not imaginable; as has been
demonstrated in art. 7, chap. IX, and often inculcated in other places,
to the end that philosophers might at last abstain from the use of such
unconceivable connexions of words. I dissent also from him in this, that
he says the similitude of bodies is the cause of their mutual
attraction. For if it were so, I see no reason why one egg should not be
attracted by another. If, therefore, one part of the earth be more
affected by the sun than another part, it proceeds from this, that one
part hath more water, the other more dry land. And from hence it is, as
I showed above, that the earth comes nearer to the sun when it shines
upon that part where there is more water, than when it shines upon that
where there is more dry land.

[Sidenote: The cause why the moon hath always one and the same face
           turned towards the earth.]

9. This eccentricity of the earth is the cause why the way of its annual
motion is not a perfect circle, but either an elliptical, or almost an
elliptical line; as also why the axis of the earth is not kept exactly
parallel to itself in all places, but only in the equinoctial points.

Now seeing I have said that the moon is carried about by the earth, in
the same manner that the earth is by the sun; and that the earth goeth
about the sun in such manner as that it shows sometimes one hemisphere,
sometimes the other to the sun; it remains to be enquired, why the moon
has always one and the same face turned towards the earth.

Suppose, therefore, the sun to be moved with simple motion in the little
circle _f g h i_, (in fig. 4) whose centre is _t_; and let ♈ ♋ ♎ ♑ be
the annual circle of the earth; and _a_ the beginning of Libra. About
the point _a_ let the little circle _l k_ be described; and in it let
the centre of the earth be understood to be moved with simple motion;
and both the sun and the earth to be moved according to the order of the
signs. Upon the centre _a_ let the way of the moon _m n o p_ be
described; and let _q r_ be the diameter of a circle cutting the globe
of the moon into two hemispheres, whereof one is seen by us when the
moon is at the full, and the other is turned from us.

The diameter therefore of the moon _q o r_ will be perpendicular to the
strait line _t a_. Wherefore the moon is carried, by reason of the
motion of the earth, from _o_ towards _p_. But by reason of the motion
of the sun, if it were in _p_ it would at the same time be carried from
_p_ towards _o_; and by these two contrary movents the strait line _q r_
will be turned about; and, in a quadrant of the circle _m n o p_, it
will be turned so much as makes the fourth part of its whole conversion.
Wherefore when the moon is in _p_, _q r_ will be parallel to the strait
line _m o_. Secondly, when the moon is in _m_, the strait line _q r_
will, by reason of the motion of the earth, be in _m o_. But by the
working of the sun's motion upon it in the quadrant _p m_, the same _q
r_ will be turned so much as makes another quarter of its whole
conversion. When, therefore, the moon is in _m_, _q r_ will be
perpendicular to the strait line _o m_. By the same reason, when the
moon is in _n_, _q r_ will be parallel to the strait line _m o_; and,
the moon returning to _o_, the same _q r_ will return to its first
place; and the body of the moon will in one entire period make also one
entire conversion upon her own axis. In the making of which, it is
manifest, that one and the same face of the moon is always turned
towards the earth. And if any diameter were taken in that little circle,
in which the moon were supposed to be carried about with simple motion,
the same effect would follow; for if there were no action from the sun,
every diameter of the moon would be carried about always parallel to
itself. Wherefore I have given a possible cause why one and the same
face of the moon is always turned towards the earth.

But it is to be noted, that when the moon is without the ecliptic, we do
not always see the same face precisely. For we see only that part which
is illuminated. But when the moon is without the ecliptic, that part
which is towards us is not exactly the same with that which is
illuminated.

[Sidenote: The cause of the tides of the ocean.]

10. To these three simple motions, one of the sun, another of the moon,
and the third of the earth, in their own little circles _f g h i_, _l
k_, and _q r_, together with the diurnal conversion of the earth, by
which conversion all things that adhere to its superficies are
necessarily carried about with it, may be referred the three phenomena
concerning the tides of the ocean. Whereof the first is the alternate
elevation and depression of the water at the shores, twice in the space
of twenty-four hours and near upon fifty-two minutes; for so it has
constantly continued in all ages. The second, that at the new and full
moons, the elevations of the water are greater than at other times
between. And the third, that when the sun is in the equinoctial, they
are yet greater than at any other time. For the salving of which
phenomena, we have already the four above-mentioned motions; to which I
assume also this, that the part of the earth which is called America,
being higher than the water, and extended almost the space of a whole
semicircle from north to south, gives a stop to the motion of the water.

This being granted, in the same 4th figure, where _l b k c_ is supposed
to be in the plane of the moon's monthly motion, let the little circle
_l d k e_ be described about the same centre _a_ in the plane of the
equinoctial. This circle therefore will decline from the circle _l b k
c_ in an angle of almost 28½ degrees; for the greatest declination of
the ecliptic is 23½, to which adding 5 for the greatest declination of
the moon from the ecliptic, the sum will be 28½ degrees. Seeing now the
waters, which are under the circle of the moon's course, are by reason
of the earth's simple motion in the plane of the same circle moved
together with the earth, that is to say, together with their own
bottoms, neither outgoing nor outgone; if we add the diurnal motion, by
which the other waters which are under the equinoctial are moved in the
same order, and consider withal that the circles of the moon and of the
equinoctial intersect one another; it will be manifest, that both those
waters, which are under the circle of the moon, and under the
equinoctial, will run together under the equinoctial; and consequently,
that their motion will not only be swifter than the ground that carries
them; but also that the waters themselves will have greater elevation
whensoever the earth is in the equinoctial. Wherefore, whatsoever the
cause of the tides may be, this may be the cause of their augmentation
at that time.

Again, seeing I have supposed the moon to be carried about by the simple
motion of the earth in the little circle _l b k c_; and demonstrated, at
the 4th article of chapter XXI, that whatsoever is moved by a movent
that hath simple motion, will be moved always with the same velocity; it
follows, that the centre of the earth will be carried in the
circumference _l b k c_ with the same velocity with which the moon is
carried in the circumference _m n o p_. Wherefore the time, in which the
moon is carried about in _m n o p_, is to the time, in which the earth
is carried about in _l b k c_, as one circumference to the other, that
is, as _a o_ to _a k_. But _a o_ is observed to be to the semidiameter
of the earth as 59 to 1; and therefore the earth, if _a k_ be put for
its semidiameter, will make fifty-nine revolutions in _l b k c_ in the
time that the moon makes one monthly circuit in _m n o p_. But the moon
makes her monthly circuit in little more than twenty-nine days.
Wherefore the earth shall make its circuit in the circumference _l b k
c_ in twelve hours and a little more, namely, about twenty-six minutes
more; that is to say, it shall make two circuits in twenty-four hours
and almost fifty-two minutes; which is observed to be the time between
the high-water of one day and the high-water of the day following. Now
the course of the waters being hindered by the southern part of America,
their motion will be interrupted there; and consequently, they will be
elevated in those places, and sink down again by their own weight, twice
in the space of twenty-four hours and fifty-two minutes. And thus I have
given a possible cause of the diurnal reciprocation of the ocean.

Now from this swelling of the ocean in those parts of the earth, proceed
the flowings and ebbings in the Atlantic, Spanish, British, and German
seas; which though they have their set times, yet upon several shores
they happen at several hours of the day. And they receive some
augmentation from the north, by reason that the shores of China and
Tartary, hindering the general course of the waters, make them swell
there, and discharge themselves in part through the strait of Anian into
the Northern Ocean, and so into the German Sea.

As for the spring tides which happen at the time of the new and full
moons, they are caused by that simple motion, which at the beginning I
supposed to be always in the moon. For as, when I showed the cause of
the eccentricity of the earth, I derived the elevation of the waters
from the simple motion of the sun; so the same may here be derived from
the simple motion of the moon. For though from the generation of clouds,
there appear in the sun a more manifest power of elevating the waters
than in the moon; yet the power of increasing moisture in vegetables and
living creatures appears more manifestly in the moon than in the sun;
which may perhaps proceed from this, that the sun raiseth up greater,
and the moon lesser drops of water. Nevertheless, it is more likely, and
more agreeable to common observation, that rain is raised not only by
the sun, but also by the moon; for almost all men expect change of
weather at the time of the conjunctions of the sun and moon with one
another and with the earth, more than in the time of their quarters.

In the last place, the cause why the spring tides are greater at the
time of the equinoxes hath been already sufficiently declared in this
article, where I have demonstrated, that the two motions of the earth,
namely, its simple motion in the little circle _l b k c_, and its
diurnal motion in _l d k e_, cause necessarily a greater elevation of
waters when the sun is about the equinoxes, than when he is in other
places. I have therefore given possible causes of the phenomenon of the
flowing and ebbing of the ocean.

[Sidenote: Cause of the precession of the equinoxes.]

11. As for the explication of the yearly _precession of the equinoctial
points_, we must remember that, as I have already shown, the annual
motion of the earth is not in the circumference of a circle, but of an
ellipsis, or a line not considerably different from that of an ellipsis.
In the first place, therefore, this elliptical line is to be described.

Let the ecliptic ♎ ♑ ♈ ♋ (in fig. 5) be divided into four equal parts by
the two strait lines _a b_ and ♑ ♋, cutting one another at right angles
in the centre _c_. And taking the arch _b d_ of two degrees and sixteen
minutes, let the strait line _d e_ be drawn parallel to _a b_, and
cutting ♑ ♋ in _f_; which being done, the eccentricity of the earth will
be _c f_. Seeing therefore the annual motion of the earth is in the
circumference of an ellipsis, of which ♑ ♋ is the greater axis, _a b_
cannot be the lesser axis; for _a b_ and ♑ ♋ are equal. Wherefore the
earth passing through _a_ and _b_, will either pass above ♑, as through
_g_, or passing through ♑, will fall between _c_ and _a_; it is no
matter which. Let it pass therefore through _g_; and let _g l_ be taken
equal to the strait line ♑ ♋; and dividing _g l_ equally in _i_, _g i_
will be equal to ♑ _f_, and _i l_ equal to _f_ ♋; and consequently the
point _i_ will cut the eccentricity _c f_ into two equal parts; and
taking _i h_ equal to _i f_, _h i_ will be the whole eccentricity. If
now a strait line, namely, the line ♎ _i_ ♈, be drawn through _i_
parallel to the strait lines _a b_ and _e d_, the way of the sun in
summer, namely, the arch ♎ _g_ ♈, will be greater than his way in
winter, by 8¼ degrees. Wherefore the true equinoxes will be in the
strait line ♎ _i_ ♈; and therefore the ellipsis of the earth's annual
motion will not pass through _a_, _g_, _b_, and _l_; but through ♎, _g_,
♈ and _l_. Wherefore the annual motion of the earth is in the ellipsis ♎
_g_ ♈ _l_; and cannot be, the eccentricity being salved, in any other
line. And this perhaps is the reason, why Kepler, against the opinion of
all the astronomers of former time, thought fit to bisect the
eccentricity of the earth, or, according to the ancients, of the sun,
not by diminishing the quantity of the same eccentricity, (because the
true measure of that quantity is the difference by which the summer arch
exceeds the winter arch), but by taking for the centre of the ecliptic
of the great orb the point _c_ nearer to _f_, and so placing the whole
great orb as much nearer to the ecliptic of the fixed stars towards ♋,
as is the distance between _c_ and _i_. For seeing the whole great orb
is but as a point in respect of the immense distance of the fixed stars,
the two strait lines ♎ ♈ and _a b_, being produced both ways to the
beginnings of Aries and Libra, will fall upon the same points of the
sphere of the fixed stars. Let therefore the diameter of the earth _m n_
be in the plane of the earth's annual motion. If now the earth be moved
by the sun's simple motion in the circumference of the ecliptic about
the centre _i_, this diameter will be kept always parallel to itself and
to the strait line _g l_. But seeing the earth is moved in the
circumference of an ellipsis without the ecliptic, the point _n_, whilst
it passeth through ♎ ♑ ♈, will go in a lesser circumference than the
point _m_; and consequently, as soon as ever it begins to be moved, it
will lose its parallelism with the strait line ♑ ♋; so that _m n_
produced will at last cut the strait line _g l_ produced. And
contrarily, as soon as _m n_ is past ♈, the earth making its way in the
internal elliptical line ♈ _l_ ♎, the same _m n_ produced towards _m_,
will cut _l g_ produced. And when the earth hath almost finished its
whole circumference, the same _m n_ shall again make a right angle with
a line drawn from the centre _i_, a little short of the point from which
the earth began its motion. And there the next year shall be one of the
equinoctial points, namely, near the end of ♍; the other shall be
opposite to it near the end of ♓. And thus the points in which the days
and nights are made equal do every year fall back; but with so slow a
motion, that, in a whole year, it makes but 51 first minutes. And this
relapse being contrary to the order of the signs, is commonly called the
_precession of the equinoxes_. Of which I have from my former
suppositions deduced a possible cause; which was to be done.

According to what I have said concerning the cause of the eccentricity
of the earth; and according to Kepler, who for the cause thereof
supposeth one part of the earth to be affected to the sun, the other
part to be disaffected; the apogæum and perigæum of the sun should be
moved every year in the same order, and with the same velocity, with
which the equinoctial points are moved; and their distance from them
should always be the quadrant of a circle; which seems to be otherwise.
For astronomers say, that the equinoxes are now, the one about 28
degrees gone back from the first star of Aries, the other as much from
the beginning of Libra; so that the apogæum of the sun or the aphelium
of the earth ought to be about the 28th degree of Cancer. But it is
reckoned to be in the 7th degree. Seeing, therefore, we have not
sufficient evidence of the ὁτί (that so it is,) it is in vain to seek
for the διότι (why it is so.) Wherefore, as long as the motion of the
apogæum is not observable by reason of the slowness thereof, and as long
as it remains doubtful whether their distance from the equinoctial
points be more or less than a quadrant precisely; so long it may be
lawful for me to think they proceed both of them with equal velocity.

Also, I do not at all meddle with the causes of the eccentricities of
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and Mercury. Nevertheless, seeing the
eccentricity of the earth may, as I have shewn, be caused by the unlike
constitution of the several parts of the earth which are alternately
turned towards the sun, it is credible also, that like effects may be
produced in these other planets from their having their superficies of
unlike parts.

And this is all I shall say concerning Sidereal Philosophy. And, though
the causes I have here supposed be not the true causes of these
phenomena, yet I have demonstrated that they are sufficient to produce
them, according to what I at first propounded.

[Illustration:

  _Vol. 1. Lat. & Eng._
  C. XXVI.
  _Fig. 1-5_
]


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXVII.
                    OF LIGHT, HEAT, AND OF COLOURS.

1. Of the immense magnitude of some bodies, and the unspeakable
    littleness of others.—2. Of the cause of the light of the sun.—3.
    How light heateth.—4. The generation of fire from the sun.—5. The
    generation of fire from collision.—6. The cause of light in
    glow-worms, rotten wood, and the Bolognan stone.—7. The cause of
    light in the concussion of sea water.—8. The cause of flame, sparks,
    and colliquation.—9. The cause why wet hay sometimes burns of its
    own accord; also the cause of lightning.—10. The cause of the force
    of gunpowder; and what is to be ascribed to the coals, what to the
    brimstone, and what to the nitre.—11. How heat is caused by
    attrition.—12. The distinction of light into first, second, &c.—13.
    The causes of the colours we see in looking through a prisma of
    glass, namely, of red, yellow, blue, and violet colour.—14. Why the
    moon and the stars appear redder in the horizon than in the midst of
    the heaven.—15. The cause of whiteness.—16. The cause of blackness.


[Sidenote: Of the immense magnitude of some bodies, and the unspeakable
           littleness of others.]

1. Besides the stars, of which I have spoken in the last chapter,
whatsoever other bodies there be in the world, they may be all
comprehended under the name of intersidereal bodies. And these I have
already supposed to be either the most fluid æther, or such bodies whose
parts have some degree of cohesion. Now, these differ from one another
in their several _consistencies_, _magnitudes_, _motions_, and
_figures_. In consistency, I suppose some bodies to be harder, others
softer through all the several degrees of _tenacity_. In magnitude, some
to be greater, others less, and many unspeakably little. For we must
remember that, by the understanding, quantity is divisible into
divisibles perpetually. And, therefore, if a man could do as much with
his hands as he can with his understanding, he would be able to take
from any given magnitude a part which should be less than any other
magnitude given. But the Omnipotent Creator of the world can actually
from a part of any thing take another part, as far as we by our
understanding can conceive the same to be divisible. Wherefore there is
no impossible smallness of bodies. And what hinders but that we may
think this likely? For we know there are some living creatures so small
that we can scarce see their whole bodies. Yet even these have their
young ones; their little veins and other vessels, and their eyes so
small as that no microscope can make them visible. So that we cannot
suppose any magnitude so little, but that our very supposition is
actually exceeded by nature. Besides, there are now such microscopes
commonly made, that the things we see with them appear a hundred
thousand times bigger than they would do if we looked upon them with our
bare eyes. Nor is there any doubt but that by augmenting the power of
these microscopes (for it may be augmented as long as neither matter nor
the hands of workmen are wanting) every one of those hundred thousandth
parts might yet appear a hundred thousand times greater than they did
before. Neither is the smallness of some bodies to be more admired than
the vast greatness of others. For it belongs to the same Infinite Power,
as well to augment infinitely as infinitely to diminish. To make the
great orb, namely, that whose radius reacheth from the earth to the sun,
but as a point in respect of the distance between the sun and the fixed
stars; and, on the contrary, to make a body so little, as to be in the
same proportion less than any other visible body, proceeds equally from
one and the same Author of Nature. But this of the immense distance of
the fixed stars, which for a long time was accounted an incredible
thing, is now believed by almost all the learned. Why then should not
that other, of the smallness of some bodies, become credible at some
time or other? For the Majesty of God appears no less in small things
than in great; and as it exceedeth human sense in the immense greatness
of the universe, so also it doth in the smallness of the parts thereof.
Nor are the first elements of compositions, nor the first beginnings of
actions, nor the first moments of times more credible, than that which
is now believed of the vast distance of the fixed stars.

Some things are acknowledged by mortal men to be very great, though
finite, as seeing them to be such. They acknowledge also that some
things, which they do not see, may be of infinite magnitude. But they
are not presently nor without great study persuaded, that there is any
mean between infinite and the greatest of those things which either they
see or imagine. Nevertheless, when after meditation and contemplation
many things which we wondered at before are now grown more familiar to
us, we then believe them, and transfer our admiration from the creatures
to the Creator. But how little soever some bodies may be, yet I will not
suppose their quantity to be less than is requisite for the salving of
the phenomena. And in like manner I shall suppose their motion, namely,
their velocity and slowness, and the variety of their figures, to be
only such as the explication of their natural causes requires. And
lastly, I suppose, that the parts of the pure æther, as if it were the
first matter, have no motion at all but what they receive from bodies
which float in them, and are not themselves fluid.

[Sidenote: Of the cause of the light of the sun.]

2. Having laid these grounds, let us come to speak of causes; and in the
first place let us inquire what may be the cause of the light of the
sun. Seeing, therefore, the body of the sun doth by its simple circular
motion thrust away the ambient ethereal substance sometimes one way
sometimes another, so that those parts, which are next the sun, being
moved by it, do propagate that motion to the next remote parts, and
these to the next, and so on continually; it must needs be that,
notwithstanding any distance, the foremost part of the eye will at last
be pressed; and by the pressure of that part, the motion will be
propagated to the innermost part of the organ of sight, namely, to the
heart; and from the reaction of the heart, there will proceed an
endeavour back by the same way, ending in the endeavour outwards of the
coat of the eye, called the _retina_. But this endeavour outwards, as
has been defined in chapter XXV, is the thing which is called light, or
the phantasm of a lucid body. For it is by reason of this phantasm that
an object is called lucid. Wherefore we have a possible cause of the
light of the sun; which I undertook to find.

[Sidenote: How light heateth.]

3. The generation of the light of the sun is accompanied with the
generation of heat. Now every man knows what heat is in himself, by
feeling it when he grows hot; but what it is in other things, he knows
only by ratiocination. For it is one thing to grow hot, and another
thing to heat or make hot. And therefore though we perceive that the
fire or the sun heateth, yet we do not perceive that it is itself hot.
That other living creatures, whilst they make other things hot, are hot
themselves, we infer by reasoning from the like sense in ourselves. But
this is not a necessary inference. For though it may truly be said of
living creatures, that _they heat, therefore they are themselves hot_;
yet it cannot from hence be truly inferred that _fire heateth, therefore
it is itself hot_; no more than this, _fire causeth pain, therefore it
is itself in pain_. Wherefore, that is only and properly called hot,
which when we feel we are necessarily hot.

Now when we grow hot, we find that our spirits and blood, and whatsoever
is fluid within us, is called out from the internal to the external
parts of our bodies, more or less, according to the degree of the heat;
and that our skin swelleth. He, therefore, that can give a possible
cause of this evocation and swelling, and such as agrees with the rest
of the phenomena of heat, may be thought to have given the cause of the
heat of the sun.

It hath been shown, in the 5th article of chapter XXI, that the fluid
medium, which we call the air, is so moved by the simple circular motion
of the sun, as that all its parts, even the least, do perpetually change
places with one another; which change of places is that which there I
called fermentation. From this fermentation of the air, I have, in the
8th article of the last chapter, demonstrated that the water may be
drawn up into the clouds.

And I shall now show that the fluid parts may, in like manner, by the
same fermentation, be drawn out from the internal to the external parts
of our bodies. For seeing that wheresoever the fluid medium is
contiguous to the body of any living creature, there the parts of that
medium are, by perpetual change of place, separated from one another;
the contiguous parts of the living creature must, of necessity,
endeavour to enter into the spaces of the separated parts. For otherwise
those parts, supposing there is no vacuum, would have no place to go
into. And therefore that, which is most fluid and separable in the parts
of the living creature which are contiguous to the medium, will go first
out; and into the place thereof will succeed such other parts as can
most easily transpire through the pores of the skin. And from hence it
is necessary that the rest of the parts, which are not separated, must
altogether be moved outwards, for the keeping of all places full. But
this motion outwards of all parts together must, of necessity, press
those parts of the ambient air which are ready to leave their places;
and therefore all the parts of the body, endeavouring at once that way,
make the body swell. Wherefore a possible cause is given of heat from
the sun; which was to be done.

[Sidenote: The generation of fire from the sun.]

4. We have now seen how light and heat are generated; heat by the simple
motion of the medium, making the parts perpetually change places with
one another; and light by this, that by the same simple motion action is
propagated in a strait line. But when a body hath its parts so moved,
that it sensibly both heats and shines at the same time, then it is that
we say fire is generated.

Now by fire I do not understand a body distinct from matter combustible
or glowing, as wood or iron, but the matter itself, not simply and
always, but then only when it shineth and heateth. He, therefore, that
renders a cause possible and agreeable to the rest of the phenomena,
namely, whence, and from what action, both the _shining_ and _heating_
proceed, may be thought to have given a possible cause of the generation
of _fire_.

Let, therefore, A B C (in the first figure) be a sphere, or the portion
of a sphere, whose centre is D; and let it be transparent and
homogeneous, as crystal, glass, or water, and objected to the sun.
Wherefore, the foremost part A B C will, by the simple motion of the
sun, by which it thrusts forwards the medium, be wrought upon by the
sunbeams in the strait lines E A, F B, and G C; which strait lines may,
in respect of the great distance of the sun, be taken for parallels. And
seeing the medium within the sphere is thicker than the medium without
it, those beams will be refracted towards the perpendiculars. Let the
strait lines E A and G C be produced till they cut the sphere in H and
I; and drawing the perpendiculars A D and C D, the refracted beams E A
and G C will of necessity fall, the one between A H and A D, the other
between C I and C D. Let those refracted beams be A K and C L. And
again, let the lines D K M and D L N be drawn perpendicular to the
sphere; and let A K and C L be produced till they meet with the strait
line B D produced in O. Seeing, therefore, the medium within the sphere
is thicker than that without it, the refracted line A K will recede
further from the perpendicular K M than K O will recede from the same.
Wherefore K O will fall between the refracted line and the
perpendicular. Let, therefore, the refracted line be K P, cutting F O in
P; and for the same reason the strait line L P will be the refracted
line of the strait line C L. Wherefore, seeing the beams are nothing
else but the ways in which the motion is propagated, the motion about P
will be so much more vehement than the motion about A B C, by how much
the base of the portion A B C is greater than the base of a like portion
in the sphere, whose centre is P, and whose magnitude is equal to that
of the little circle about P, which comprehendeth all the beams that are
propagated from A B C; and this sphere being much less than the sphere A
B C, the parts of the medium, that is, of the air about P, will change
places with one another with much greater celerity than those about A B
C. If, therefore, any matter combustible, that is to say, such as may be
easily dissipated, be placed in P, the parts of that matter, if the
proportion be great enough between A C and a like portion of the little
circle about P, will be freed from their mutual cohesion, and being
separated will acquire simple motion. But vehement simple motion
generates in the beholder a phantasm of lucid and hot, as I have before
demonstrated of the simple motion of the sun; and therefore the
combustible matter which is placed in P will be made lucid and hot, that
is to say, will be fire. Wherefore I have rendered a possible cause of
fire; which was to be done.

[Sidenote: The generation of fire from collision.]

5. From the manner by which the sun generateth fire, it is easy to
explain the manner by which fire may be generated by the collision of
two flints. For by that collision some of those particles of which the
stone is compacted, are violently separated and thrown off; and being
withal swiftly turned round, the eye is moved by them, as it is in the
generation of light by the sun. Wherefore they shine; and falling upon
matter which is already half dissipated, such as is tinder, they
thoroughly dissipate the parts thereof, and make them turn round. From
whence, as I have newly shown, light and heat, that is to say fire, is
generated.

[Sidenote: The cause of light in glow-worms, rotten wood, and the
           Bolognan stone.]

6. The shining of glow-worms, some kinds of rotten wood, and of a kind
of stone made at Bologna, may have one common cause, namely, the
exposing of them to the hot sun. We find by experience that the Bologna
stone shines not, unless it be so exposed; and after it has been exposed
it shines but for a little time, namely, as long as it retains a certain
degree of heat. And the cause may be that the parts, of which it is
made, may together with heat have simple motion imprinted in them by the
sun. Which if it be so, it is necessary that it shine in the dark, as
long as there is sufficient heat in it; but this ceasing, it will shine
no longer. Also we find by experience that in the glow-worm there is a
certain thick humour, like the crystalline humour of the eye; which if
it be taken out and held long enough in one's fingers, and then be
carried into the dark, it will shine by reason of the warmth it received
from the fingers; but as soon as it is cold it will cease shining. From
whence, therefore, can these creatures have their light, but from lying
all day in the sunshine in the hottest time of summer? In the same
manner, rotten wood, except it grow rotten in the sunshine, or be
afterwards long enough exposed to the sun, will not shine. That this
doth not happen in every worm, nor in all kinds of rotten wood, nor in
all calcined stones, the cause may be that the parts, of which the
bodies are made, are different both in motion and figure from the parts
of bodies of other kinds.

[Sidenote: The cause of light in the concussion of sea water.]

7. Also the sea water shineth when it is either dashed with the strokes
of oars, or when a ship in its course breaks strongly through it; but
more or less, according as the wind blows from different points. The
cause whereof may be this, that the particles of salt, though they never
shine in the salt-pits, where they are but slowly drawn up by the sun,
being here beaten up into the air in greater quantities and with more
force, are withal made to turn round, and consequently to shine, though
weakly. I have, therefore, given a possible cause of this phenomenon.

[Sidenote: The cause of flame, sparks, & colliquation.]

8. If such matter as is compounded of hard little bodies be set on fire,
it must needs be, that, as they fly out in greater or less quantities,
the flame which is made by them will be greater or less. And if the
ethereal or fluid part of that matter fly out together with them, their
motion will be the swifter, as it is in wood and other things which
flame with a manifest mixture of wind. When, therefore, these hard
particles by their flying out move the eye strongly, they shine bright;
and a great quantity of them flying out together, they make a great
shining body. For flame being nothing but an aggregate of shining
particles, the greater the aggregate is, the greater and more manifest
will be the flame. I have, therefore, shown a possible cause of flame.
And from hence the cause appears evidently, why glass is so easily and
quickly melted by the small flame of a candle blown, which will not be
melted without blowing but by a very strong fire.

Now, if from the same matter there be a part broken off, namely, such a
part as consisteth of many of the small particles, of this is made a
spark. For from the breaking off it hath a violent turning round, and
from hence it shines. But though from this matter there fly neither
flame nor sparks, yet some of the smallest parts of it may be carried
out as far as to the superficies, and remain there as ashes; the parts
whereof are so extremely small, that it cannot any longer be doubted how
far nature may proceed in dividing.

Lastly, though by the application of fire to this matter there fly
little or nothing from it, yet there will be in the parts an endeavour
to simple motion; by which the whole body will either be melted, or,
which is a degree of melting, softened. For all motion has some effect
upon all matter whatsoever, as has been shown at art. 3, chap. XV. Now
if it be softened to such a degree, as that the stubbornness of the
parts be exceeded by their gravity, then we say it is melted; otherwise,
softened and made pliant and ductile.

Again, the matter having in it some particles hard, others ethereal or
watery; if, by the application of fire, these latter be called out, the
former will thereby come to a more full contact with one another; and,
consequently, will not be so easily separated; that is to say, the whole
body will be made harder. And this may be the cause why the same fire
makes some things soft, others hard.

[Sidenote: The cause why wet hay sometimes burns of its own accord; also
           the cause of lightning.]

9. It is known by experience that if hay be laid wet together in a heap,
it will after a time begin to smoke, and then burn as it were of itself.
The cause whereof seems to be this, that in the air, which is enclosed
within the hay, there are those little bodies, which, as I have
supposed, are moved freely with simple motion. But this motion being by
degrees hindered more and more by the descending moisture, which at the
last fills and stops all the passages, the thinner parts of the air
ascend by penetrating the water; and those hard little bodies, being so
thrust together that they touch and press one another, acquire stronger
motion; till at last by the increased strength of this motion the watery
parts are first driven outwards, from whence appears vapour; and by the
continued increase of this motion, the smallest particles of the dried
hay are forced out, and recovering their natural simple motion, they
grow hot and shine, that is to say, they are set on fire.

The same also may be the cause of lightning, which happens in the
hottest time of the year, when the water is raised up in greatest
quantity and carried highest. For after the first clouds are raised,
others after others follow them; and being congealed above, they happen,
whilst some of them ascend and others descend, to fall one upon another
in such manner, as that in some places all their parts are joined
together, in others they leave hollow spaces between them; and into
these spaces, the ethereal parts being forced out by the compressure of
the clouds, many of the harder little bodies are so pent together, as
they have not the liberty of such motion as is natural to the air.
Wherefore their endeavour grows more vehement, till at last they force
their way through the clouds, sometimes in one place, sometimes in
another; and, breaking through with great noise, they move the air
violently, and striking our eyes, generate light, that is to say, they
shine. And this shining is that we call lightning.

[Sidenote: The cause of the force of gunpowder; and what is to be
           ascribed to the coals, what to the brimstone, and what to the
           nitre.]

10. The most common phenomenon proceeding from fire, and yet the most
admirable of all others, is the force of gunpowder fired; which being
compounded of nitre, brimstone and coals, beaten small, hath from the
coals its first taking fire; from the brimstone its nourishment and
flame, that is to say, light and motion, and from the nitre the
vehemence of both. Now if a piece of nitre, before it is beaten, be laid
upon a burning coal, first it melts, and, like water, quencheth that
part of the coal it toucheth. Then vapour or air, flying out where the
coal and nitre join, bloweth the coal with great swiftness and vehemence
on all sides. And from hence it comes to pass, that by two contrary
motions, the one, of the particles which go out of the burning coal, the
other, of those of the ethereal and watery substance of the nitre, is
generated that vehement motion and inflammation. And, lastly, when there
is no more action from the nitre, that is to say, when the volatile
parts of the nitre are flown out, there is found about the sides a
certain white substance, which being thrown again into the fire, will
grow red-hot again, but will not be dissipated, at least unless the fire
be augmented. If now a possible cause of this be found out, the same
will also be a possible cause why a grain of gunpowder set on fire doth
expand itself with such vehement motion, and shine. And it may be caused
in this manner.

Let the particles, of which nitre consisteth, be supposed to be some of
them hard, others watery, and the rest ethereal. Also let the hard
particles be supposed to be spherically hollow, like small bubbles, so
that many of them growing together may constitute a body, whose little
caverns are filled with a substance which is either watery, or ethereal,
or both. As soon, therefore, as the hard particles are dissipated, the
watery and ethereal particles will necessarily fly out; and as they fly,
of necessity blow strongly the burning coals and brimstone which are
mingled together; whereupon there will follow a great expansion of
light, with vehement flame, and a violent dissipation of the particles
of the nitre, the brimstone and the coals. Wherefore I have given a
possible cause of the force of fired gunpowder.

It is manifest from hence, that for the rendering of the cause why a
bullet of lead or iron, shot from a piece of ordnance, flies with so
great velocity, there is no necessity to introduce such rarefaction, as,
by the common definition of it, makes the same matter to have sometimes
more, sometimes less quantity; which is inconceivable. For every thing
is said to be greater or less, as it hath more or less quantity. The
violence with which a bullet is thrust out of a gun, proceeds from the
swiftness of the small particles of the fired powder; at least it may
proceed from that cause without the supposition of any empty space.

[Sidenote: How heat is caused by attrition.]

11. Besides, by the attrition or rubbing of one body against another, as
of wood against wood, we find that not only a certain degree of heat,
but fire itself is sometimes generated. For such motion is the
reciprocation of pressure, sometimes one way, sometimes the other; and
by this reciprocation whatsoever is fluid in both the pieces of wood is
forced hither and thither; and consequently, to an endeavour of getting
out; and at last by breaking out makes fire.

[Sidenote: The distinction of light into first, second, &c.]

12. Now light is distinguished into, first, second, third, and so on
infinitely. And we call that first light, which is in the first lucid
body; as the sun, fire, &c.: second, that which is in such bodies, as
being not transparent are illuminated by the sun; as the moon, a wall,
&c.: and third, that which is in bodies not transparent, but illuminated
by second light, &c.

[Sidenote: The causes of the colours we see in looking through a prisma
           of glass, namely, of red, yellow, blue, & violet colour.]

13. _Colour_ is light, but troubled light, namely, such as is generated
by perturbed motion; as shall be made manifest by the red, yellow, blue
and purple, which are generated by the interposition of a diaphanous
prisma, whose opposite bases are triangular, between the light and that
which is enlightened.

[Sidenote: [Discussion of Figure 27.2]]

For let there be a prisma of glass, or of any other transparent matter
which is of greater density than air; and let the triangle A B C be the
base of this prisma. Also let the strait line D E be the diameter of the
sun's body, having oblique position to the strait line A B; and let the
sunbeams pass in the lines D A and E B C. And lastly, let the strait
lines D A and E C be produced indefinitely to F and G. Seeing therefore
the strait line D A, by reason of the density of the glass, is refracted
towards the perpendicular; let the line refracted at the point A be the
strait line A H. And again, seeing the medium below A C is thinner than
that above it, the other refraction, which will be made there, will
diverge from the perpendicular. Let therefore this second refracted line
be A I. Also let the same be done at the point C, by making the first
refracted line to be C K, and the second C L. Seeing therefore the cause
of the refraction in the point A of the strait line of A B is the excess
of the resistance of the medium in A B above the resistance of the air,
there must of necessity be reaction from the point A towards the point
B; and consequently the medium at A within the triangle A B C will have
its motion troubled, that is to say, the strait motion in A F and A H
will be mixed with the transverse motion between the same A F and A H,
represented by the short transverse lines in the triangle A F H. Again,
seeing at the point A of the strait line A C there is a second
refraction from A H in A I, the motion of the medium will again be
perturbed by reason of the transverse reaction from A towards C,
represented likewise by the short transverse lines in the triangle A H
I. And in the same manner there is a double perturbation represented by
the transverse lines in the triangles C G K and C K L. But as for the
light between A I and C G, it will not be perturbed; because, if there
were in all the points of the strait lines A B and A C the same action
which is in the points A and C, then the plane of the triangle C G K
would be everywhere coincident with the plane of the triangle A F H; by
which means all would appear alike between A and C. Besides, it is to be
observed, that all the reaction at A tends towards the illuminated parts
which are between A and C, and consequently perturbeth the first light.
And on the contrary, that all the reaction at C tends towards the parts
without the triangle or without the prisma A B C, where there is none
but second light; and that the triangle A F H shows that perturbation of
light which is made in the glass itself; as the triangle A H I shows
that perturbation of light which is made below the glass. In like
manner, that C G K shows the perturbation of light within the glass; and
C K L that which is below the glass. From whence there are four divers
motions, or four different illuminations or colours, whose differences
appear most manifestly to the sense in a prisma, whose base is an
equilateral triangle, when the sunbeams that pass through it are
received upon a white paper. For the triangle A F H appears red to the
sense; the triangle A H I yellow; the triangle C G K green, and
approaching to blue; and lastly, the triangle C K L appears purple. It
is therefore evident that when weak but first light passeth through a
more resisting diaphanous body, as glass, the beams, which fall upon it
transversely, make redness; and when the same first light is stronger,
as it is in the thinner medium below the strait line A C, the transverse
beams make yellowness. Also when second light is strong, as it is in the
triangle C G K, which is nearest to the first light, the transverse
beams make greenness; and when the same second light is weaker, as in
the triangle C K L, they make a purple colour.

[Sidenote: Why the moon and the stars appear redder in the horizon than
           in the midst of the heaven.]

14. From hence may be deduced a cause, why the moon and stars appear
bigger and redder near the horizon than in the mid-heaven. For between
the eye and the apparent horizon there is more impure air, such as is
mingled with watery and earthy little bodies, than is between the same
eye and the more elevated part of heaven. But vision is made by beams
which constitute a cone, whose base, if we look upon the moon, is the
moon's face, and whose vertex is in the eye; and therefore, many beams
from the moon must needs fall upon little bodies that are without the
visual cone, and be by them reflected to the eye. But these reflected
beams tend all in lines which are transverse to the visual cone, and
make at the eye an angle which is greater than the angle of the cone.
Wherefore, the moon appears greater in the horizon, than when she is
more elevated. And because those reflected beams go transversely, there
will be generated, by the last article, redness. A possible cause
therefore is shown, why the moon as also the stars appear greater and
redder in the horizon, than in the midst of heaven. The same also may be
the cause, why the sun appears in the horizon greater and of a colour
more degenerating to yellow, than when he is higher elevated. For the
reflection from the little bodies between, and the transverse motion of
the medium, are still the same. But the light of the sun is much
stronger than that of the moon; and therefore, by the last article, his
splendour must needs by this perturbation degenerate into yellowness.

But for the generation of these four colours, it is not necessary that
the figure of the glass be a prisma; for if it were spherical it would
do the same. For in a sphere the sunbeams are twice refracted and twice
reflected. And this being observed by Des Cartes, and withal that a
rainbow never appears but when it rains; as also, that the drops of rain
have their figures almost spherical; he hath shown from thence the cause
of the colours in the rainbow; which therefore need not be repeated.

[Sidenote: The cause of whiteness.]

15. _Whiteness_ is light, but light perturbed by the reflections of many
beams of light coming to the eye together within a little space. For if
glass or any other diaphanous body be reduced to very small parts by
contusion or concussion, every one of those parts, if the beams of a
lucid body be from any one point of the same reflected to the eye, will
represent to the beholder an idea or image of the whole lucid body, that
is to say, a phantasm of white. For the strongest light is the most
white; and therefore many such parts will make many such images.
Wherefore, if those parts lie thick and close together, those many
images will appear confusedly, and will by reason of the confused light
represent a white colour. So that from hence may be deduced a possible
cause, why glass beaten, that is, reduced to powder, looks white. Also
why water and snow are white; they being nothing but a heap of very
small diaphanous bodies, namely, of little bubbles, from whose several
convex superficies there are by reflection made several confused
phantasms of the whole lucid body, that is to say, whiteness. For the
same reason, salt and nitre are white, as consisting of small bubbles
which contain within them water and air; as is manifest in nitre, from
this, that being thrown into the fire it violently blows the same; which
salt also doth, but with less violence. But if a white body be exposed,
not to the light of the day, but to that of the fire or of a candle, it
will not at the first sight be easily judged whether it be white or
yellow; the cause whereof may be this, that the light of those things,
which burn and flame, is almost of a middle colour between whiteness and
yellowness.

[Sidenote: The cause of blackness.]

16. As whiteness is light, so _blackness_ is the privation of light, or
darkness. And, from hence it is, first, that all holes, from which no
light can be reflected to the eye, appear black. Secondly, that when a
body hath little eminent particles erected straight up from the
superficies, so that the beams of light which fall upon them are
reflected not to the eye but to the body itself, that superficies
appears black; in the same manner as the sea appears black when ruffled
by the wind. Thirdly, that any combustible matter is by the fire made to
look black before it shines. For the endeavour of the fire being to
dissipate the smallest parts of such bodies as are thrown into it, it
must first raise and erect those parts before it can work their
dissipation. If, therefore, the fire be put out before the parts are
totally dissipated, the coal will appear black; for the parts being only
erected, the beams of light falling upon them will not be reflected to
the eye, but to the coal itself. Fourthly, that burning glasses do more
easily burn black things than white. For in a white superficies the
eminent parts are convex, like little bubbles; and therefore the beams
of light, which fall upon them, are reflected every way from the
reflecting body. But in a black superficies, where the eminent particles
are more erected, the beams of light falling upon them are all
necessarily reflected towards the body itself; and, therefore, bodies
that are black are more easily set on fire by the sun beams, than those
that are white. Fifthly, that all colours that are made of the mixture
of white and black proceed from the different position of the particles
that rise above the superficies, and their different forms of asperity.
For, according to these differences, more or fewer beams of light are
reflected from several bodies to the eye. But in regard those
differences are innumerable, and the bodies themselves so small that we
cannot perceive them; the explication and precise determination of the
causes of all colours is a thing of so great difficulty, that I dare not
undertake it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  __Vol. I. Lat. & Eng.__
  C. XXVII.
  _Fig. 1-2_]
]

                        │Fig 1     │Fig 2     │

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                -------


                            CHAPTER XXVIII.

                OF COLD, WIND, HARD, ICE, RESTITUTION OF
                 BODIES BENT, DIAPHANOUS, LIGHTNING AND
                  THUNDER; AND OF THE HEADS OF RIVERS.

1. Why breath from the same mouth sometimes heats and sometimes
    cools.—2. Wind, and the inconstancy of winds, whence.—3 Why there is
    a constant, though not a great wind, from east to west, near the
    equator.—4. What is the effect of air pent in between the clouds.—5.
    No change from soft to hard, but by motion.—6. What is the cause of
    cold near the poles.—7.. The cause of ice; and why the cold is more
    remiss in rainy than in clear weather. Why water doth not freeze in
    deep wells as it doth near the superficies of the earth. Why ice is
    not so heavy as water; and why wine is not so easily frozen as
    water.—8. Another cause of hardness from the fuller contact of
    atoms; also, how hard things are broken.—9. A third cause of
    hardness from heat.—10. A fourth cause of hardness from the motion
    of atoms enclosed in a narrow space.—11. How hard things are
    softened.—12. Whence proceed the spontaneous restitution of things
    bent.—13. Diaphanous and opacous, what they are, and whence.—14. The
    cause of lightning and thunder.—15. Whence it proceeds that clouds
    can fall again after they are once elevated and frozen.—16. How it
    could be that the moon was eclipsed, when she was not diametrically
    opposite to the sun.—17. By what means many suns may appear at
    once.—18. Of the heads of rivers.


[Sidenote: Why breath from the same mouth sometimes heats and sometimes
           cools.]

1. As, when the motion of the ambient ethereal substance makes the
spirits and fluid parts of our bodies tend outwards, we acknowledge
heat; so, by the endeavour inwards of the same spirits and humours, we
feel cold. So that to cool is to make the exterior parts of the body
endeavour inwards, by a motion contrary to that of calefaction, by which
the internal parts are called outwards. He, therefore, that would know
the cause of cold, must find by what motion or motions the exterior
parts of any body endeavour to retire inwards. To begin with those
phenomena which are the most familiar. There is almost no man but knows,
that breath blown strongly, and which comes from the mouth with
violence, that is to say, the passage being strait, will cool the hand;
and that the same breath blown gently, that is to say, through a greater
aperture, will warm the same. The cause of which phenomenon may be this,
the breath going out hath two motions; the one, of the whole and direct,
by which the foremost parts of the hand are driven inwards; the other,
simple motion of the small particles of the same breath, which, (as I
have shown in the 3rd article of the last chapter, causeth heat.
According, therefore, as either of these motions is predominant, so
there is the sense sometimes of cold, sometimes of heat. Wherefore, when
the breath is softly breathed out at a large passage, that simple motion
which causeth heat prevaileth, and consequently heat is felt; and when,
by compressing the lips, the breath is more strongly blown out, then is
the direct motion prevalent, which makes us feel cold. For, the direct
motion of the breath or air is wind; and all wind cools or diminisheth
former heat.

[Sidenote: Wind, and the inconstancy of winds, whence.]

2. And seeing not only great wind, but almost any ventilation and
stirring of the air, doth refrigerate; the reason of many experiments
concerning cold cannot well be given without finding first what are the
causes of wind. Now, wind is nothing else but the direct motion of the
air thrust forwards; which, nevertheless, when many winds concur, may be
circular or otherwise indirect, as it is in whirlwinds. Wherefore, in
the first place we are to enquire into the causes of winds. Wind is air
moved in a considerable quantity, and that either in the manner of
waves, which is both forwards and also up and down, or else forwards
only.

Supposing, therefore, the air both clear and calm for any time how
little soever, yet, the greater bodies of the world being so disposed
and ordered as has been said, it will be necessary that a wind presently
arise somewhere. For, seeing that motion of the parts of the air, which
is made by the simple motion of the sun in his own epicycle, causeth an
exhalation of the particles of water from the seas and all other moist
bodies, and those particles make clouds; it must needs follow, that,
whilst the particles of water pass upwards, the particles of air, for
the keeping of all spaces full, be jostled out on every side, and urge
the next particles, and these the next; till having made their circuit,
there comes continually so much air to the hinder parts of the earth as
there went water from before it. Wherefore, the ascending vapours move
the air towards the sides every way; and all direct motion of the air
being wind, they make a wind. And if this wind meet often with other
vapours which arise in other places, it is manifest that the force
thereof will be augmented, and the way or course of it changed. Besides,
according as the earth, by its diurnal motion, turns sometimes the
drier, sometimes the moister part towards the sun, so sometimes a
greater, sometimes a less, quantity of vapours will be raised; that is
to say, sometimes there will be a less, sometimes a greater wind.
Wherefore, I have rendered a possible cause of such winds as are
generated by vapours; and also of their inconstancy.

From hence it follows that these winds cannot be made in any place,
which is higher than that to which vapours may ascend. Nor is that
incredible which is reported of the highest mountains, as the Peak of
Teneriffe and the Andes of Peru, namely, that they are not at all
troubled with these inconstant winds. And if it were certain that
neither rain nor snow were ever seen in the highest tops of those
mountains, it could not be doubted but that they are higher than any
place to which vapours use to ascend.

[Sidenote: Why there is a constant, though not a great wind, from east
           to west, near the equator.]

3. Nevertheless, there may be wind there, though not that which is made
by the ascent of vapours, yet a less and more constant wind, like the
continued blast of a pair of bellows, blowing from the east. And this
may have a double cause; the one, the diurnal motion of the earth; the
other, its simple motion in its own epicycle. For these mountains being,
by reason of their height, more eminent than all the rest of the parts
of the earth, do by both these motions drive the air from the west
eastwards. To which, though the diurnal motion contribute but little,
yet seeing I have supposed that the simple motion of the earth, in its
own epicycle, makes two revolutions in the same time in which the
diurnal motion makes but one, and that the semidiameter of the epicycle
is double to the semidiameter of the diurnal conversion, the motion of
every point of the earth in its own epicycle will have its velocity
quadruple to that of the diurnal motion; so that by both these motions
together, the tops of those hills will sensibly be moved against the
air; and consequently a wind will be felt. For whether the air strike
the sentient, or the sentient the air, the perception of motion will be
the same. But this wind, seeing it is not caused by the ascent of
vapours, must necessarily be very constant.

[Sidenote: What is the effect of air pent in between the clouds.]

4. When one cloud is already ascended into the air, if another cloud
ascend towards it, that part of the air, which is intercepted between
them both, must of necessity be pressed out every way. Also when both of
them, whilst the one ascends and the other either stays or descends,
come to be joined in such manner as that the ethereal substance be shut
within them on every side, it will by this compression also go out by
penetrating the water. But in the meantime, the hard particles, which
are mingled with the air and are agitated, as I have supposed, with
simple motion, will not pass through the water of the clouds, but be
more straitly compressed within their cavities. And this I have
demonstrated at the 4th and 5th articles of chapter XXII. Besides,
seeing the globe of the earth floateth in the air which is agitated by
the sun's motion, the parts of the air resisted by the earth will spread
themselves every way upon the earth's superficies; as I have shown at
the 8th article of chapter XXI.

[Sidenote: No change from soft to hard, but by motion.]

5. We perceive a body to be hard, from this, that, when touching it, we
would thrust forwards that part of the same which we touch, we cannot do
it otherwise than by thrusting forwards the whole body. We may indeed
easily and sensibly thrust forwards any particle of the air or water
which we touch, whilst yet the rest of its parts remain to sense
unmoved. But we cannot do so to any part of a stone. Wherefore I define
a _hard_ body to be that whereof no part can be sensibly moved, unless
the whole be moved. Whatsoever therefore is soft or fluid, the same can
never be made hard but by such motion as makes many of the parts
together stop the motion of some one part, by resisting the same.

[Sidenote: What it the cause of cold near the poles.]

6. Those things premised, I shall show a possible cause why there is
greater cold near the poles of the earth, than further from them. The
motion of the sun between the tropics, driving the air towards that part
of the earth's superficies which is perpendicularly under it, makes it
spread itself every way; and the velocity of this expansion of the air
grows greater and greater, as the superficies of the earth comes to be
more and more straitened, that is to say, as the circles which are
parallel to the equator come to be less and less. Wherefore this
expansive motion of the air drives before it the parts of the air, which
are in its way, continually towards the poles more and more strongly, as
its force comes to be more and more united, that is to say, as the
circles which are parallel to the equator are less and less; that is, so
much the more, by how much they are nearer to the poles of the earth. In
those places, therefore, which are nearer to the poles, there is greater
cold than in those which are more remote from them. Now this expansion
of the air upon the superficies of the earth, from east to west, doth,
by reason of the sun's perpetual accession to the places which are
successively under it, make it cold at the time of the sun's rising and
setting; but as the sun comes to be continually more and more
perpendicular to those cooled places, so by the heat, which is generated
by the supervening simple motion of the sun, that cold is again
remitted; and can never be great, because the action by which it was
generated is not permanent. Wherefore I have rendered a possible cause
of cold in those places that are near the poles, or where the obliquity
of the sun is great.

[Sidenote: The cause of ice; and why the cold is more remiss in rainy
           than in clear weather. Why water doth not freeze in deep
           wells, as it doth near the superficies of the earth. Why ice
           is not so heavy as water; and why wine is not so easily
           frozen as water.]

7. How water may be congealed by cold, may be explained in this manner.
Let A (in figure 1) represent the sun, and B the earth. A will therefore
be much greater than B. Let E F be in the plane of the equinoctial; to
which let G H, I K, and L C be parallel. Lastly, let C and D be the
poles of the earth. The air, therefore, by its action in those
parallels, will rake the superficies of the earth; and that with motion
so much the stronger, by how much the parallel circles towards the poles
grow less and less. From whence must arise a wind, which will force
together the uppermost parts of the water, and withal raise them a
little, weakening their endeavour towards the centre of the earth. And
from their endeavour towards the centre of the earth, joined with the
endeavour of the said wind, the uppermost parts of the water will be
pressed together and coagulated, that is to say, the top of the water
will be skinned over and hardened. And so again, the water next the top
will be hardened in the same manner, till at length the ice be thick.
And this ice, being now compacted of little hard bodies, must also
contain many particles of air received into it.

As rivers and seas, so also in the same manner may the clouds be frozen.
For when, by the ascending and descending of several clouds at the same
time, the air intercepted between them is by compression forced out, it
rakes, and by little and little hardens them. And though those small
drops, which usually make clouds, be not yet united into greater bodies,
yet the same wind will be made; and by it, as water is congealed into
ice, so will vapours in the same manner be congealed into snow. From the
same cause it is that ice may be made by art, and that not far from the
fire. For it is done by the mingling of snow and salt together, and by
burying in it a small vessel full of water. Now while the snow and salt,
which have in them a great deal of air, are melting, the air, which is
pressed out every way in wind, rakes the sides of the vessel; and as the
wind by its motion rakes the vessel, so the vessel by the same motion
and action congeals the water within it.

We find by experience, that cold is always more remiss in places where
it rains, or where the weather is cloudy, things being alike in all
other respects, than where the air is clear. And this agreeth very well
with what I have said before. For in clear weather, the course of the
wind which, as I said even now, rakes the superficies of the earth, as
it is free from all interruption, so also it is very strong. But when
small drops of water are either rising or falling, that wind is
repelled, broken, and dissipated by them; and the less the wind is, the
less is the cold.

We find also by experience, that in deep wells the water freezeth not so
much as it doth upon the superficies of the earth. For the wind, by
which ice is made, entering into the earth by reason of the laxity of
its parts, more or less, loseth some of its force, though not much. So
that if the well be not deep, it will freeze; whereas if it be so deep,
as that the wind which causeth cold cannot reach it, it will not freeze.

We find moreover by experience, that ice is lighter than water. The
cause whereof is manifest from that which I have already shown, namely,
that air is received in and mingled with the particles of the water
whilst it is congealing.

Lastly, wine is not so easily congealed as water, because in wine there
are particles, which, being not fluid, are moved very swiftly, and by
their motion congelation is retarded. But if the cold prevail against
this motion, then the outermost parts of the wine will be first frozen,
and afterwards the inner parts; whereof this is a sign, that the wine
which remains unfrozen in the midst will be very strong.

[Sidenote: Another cause of hardness from the fuller contact of atoms.
           Also how hard things are broken.]

8. We have seen one way of making things hard, namely, by congelation.
Another way is thus. Having already supposed that innumerable atoms,
some harder than others and that have several simple motions of their
own, are intermingled with the ethereal substance; it follows
necessarily from hence, that by reason of the fermentation of the whole
air, of which I have spoken in chapter XXI, some of those atoms meeting
with others will cleave together, by applying themselves to one another
in such manner as is agreeable to their motions and mutual contacts;
and, seeing there is no vacuum, cannot be pulled asunder, but by so much
force as is sufficient to overcome their hardness.

Now there are innumerable degrees of hardness. As for example, there is
a degree of it in water, as is manifest from this, that upon a plane it
may be drawn any way at pleasure by one's finger. There is a greater
degree of it in clammy liquors, which, when they are poured out, do in
falling downwards dispose themselves into one continued thread; which
thread, before it be broken, will by little and little diminish its
thickness, till at last it be so small, as that it seems to break only
in a point; and in their separation the external parts break first from
one another, and then the more internal parts successively one after
another. In wax there is yet a greater degree of hardness. For when we
would pull one part of it from another, we first make the whole mass
slenderer, before we can pull it asunder. And how much the harder
anything is which we would break, so much the more force we must apply
to it. Wherefore, if we go on to harder things, as ropes, wood, metals,
stones, &c., reason prompteth us to believe that the same, though not
always sensibly, will necessarily happen; and that even the hardest
things are broken asunder in the same manner, namely, by solution of
their continuity begun in the outermost superficies, and proceeding
successively to the innermost parts. In like manner, when the parts of
bodies are to be separated, not by pulling them asunder, but by breaking
them, the first separation will necessarily be in the convex superficies
of the bowed part of the body, and afterwards in the concave
superficies. For in all bowing there is in the convex superficies an
endeavour in the parts to go one from another, and in the concave
superficies to penetrate one another.

This being well understood, a reason may be given how two bodies, which
are contiguous in one common superficies, may by force be separated
without the introduction of vacuum; though Lucretius thought otherwise,
believing that such separation was a strong establishment of vacuum. For
a marble pillar being made to hang by one of its bases, if it be long
enough, it will by its own weight be broken asunder; and yet it will not
necessarily follow that there should be vacuum, seeing the solution of
its continuity may begin in the circumference, and proceed successively
to the midst thereof.

[Sidenote: A third cause of hardness, from heat.]

9. Another cause of hardness in some things may be in this manner. If a
soft body consist of many hard particles, which by the intermixture of
many other fluid particles cohere but loosely together, those fluid
parts, as hath been shown in the last article of chapter XXI, will be
exhaled; by which means each hard particle will apply itself to the next
to it according to a greater superficies, and consequently they will
cohere more closely to one another, that is to say, the whole mass will
be made harder.

[Sidenote: A fourth cause of hardness, from the motion of atoms enclosed
           in a narrow space.]

10. Again, in some things hardness may be made to a certain degree in
this manner. When any fluid substance hath in it certain very small
bodies intermingled, which, being moved with simple motion of their own,
contribute like motion to the parts of the fluid substance, and this be
done in a small enclosed space, as in the hollow of a little sphere, or
a very slender pipe, if the motion be vehement and there be a great
number of these small enclosed bodies, two things will happen; the one,
that the fluid substance will have an endeavour of dilating itself at
once every way; the other, that if those small bodies can nowhere get
out, then from their reflection it will follow, that the motion of the
parts of the enclosed fluid substance, which was vehement before, will
now be much more vehement. Wherefore, if any one particle of that fluid
substance should be touched and pressed by some external movent, it
could not yield but by the application of very sensible force. Wherefore
the fluid substance, which is enclosed and so moved, hath some degree of
hardness. Now, greater and less degree of hardness depends upon the
quantity and velocity of those small bodies, and upon the narrowness of
the place both together.

[Sidenote: How hard things are softened.]

11. Such things as are made hard by sudden heat, namely such as are
hardened by fire, are commonly reduced to their former soft form by
maceration. For fire hardens by evaporation, and therefore if the
evaporated moisture be restored again, the former nature and form is
restored together with it. And such things as are frozen with cold, if
the wind by which they were frozen change into the opposite quarter,
they will be unfrozen again, unless they have gotten a habit of new
motion or endeavour by long continuance in that hardness. Nor is it
enough to cause thawing, that there be a cessation of the freezing wind;
for the taking away of the cause doth not destroy a produced effect; but
the thawing also must have its proper cause, namely, a contrary wind, or
at least a wind opposite in some degree. And this we find to be true by
experience. For, if ice be laid in a place so well enclosed that the
motion of the air cannot get to it, that ice will remain unchanged,
though the place be not sensibly cold.

[Sidenote: Whence proceeds the spontaneous restitution of things bent.]

12. Of hard bodies, some may manifestly be bowed; others not, but are
broken in the very first moment of their bending. And of such bodies as
may manifestly be bended, some being bent, do, as soon as ever they are
set at liberty, restore themselves to their former posture; others
remain still bent. Now if the cause of this restitution be asked, I say,
it may be in this manner, namely, that the particles of the bended body,
whilst it is held bent, do nevertheless retain their motion; and by this
motion they restore it as soon as the force is removed by which it was
bent. For when any thing is bent, as a plate of steel, and, as soon as
the force is removed, restores itself again, it is evident that the
cause of its restitution cannot be referred to the ambient air; nor can
it be referred to the removal of the force by which it was bent; for in
things that are at rest the taking away of impediments is not a
sufficient cause of their future motion; there being no other cause of
motion, but motion. The cause therefore of such restitution is in the
parts of the steel itself. Wherefore, whilst it remains bent, there is
in the parts, of which it consisteth, some motion though invisible; that
is to say, some endeavour at least that way by which the restitution is
to be made; and therefore this endeavour of all the parts together is
the first beginning of restitution; so that the impediment being
removed, that is to say, the force by which it was held bent, it will be
restored again. Now the motion of the parts, by which this done, is that
which I called simple motion, or motion returning into itself. When
therefore in the bending of a plate the ends are drawn together, there
is on one side a mutual compression of the parts; which compression is
one endeavour opposite to another endeavour: and on the other side a
divulsion of the parts. The endeavour therefore of the parts on one side
tends to the restitution of the plate from the middle towards the ends;
and on the other side, from the ends towards the middle. Wherefore the
impediment being taken away, this endeavour, which is the beginning of
restitution, will restore the plate to its former posture. And thus I
have given a possible cause why some bodies, when they are bent, restore
themselves again; which was to be done.

As for stones, seeing they are made by the accretion of many very hard
particles within the earth; which particles have no great coherence,
that is to say, touch one another in small latitude, and consequently
admit many particles of air; it must needs be that, in bending of them,
their internal parts will not easily be compressed, by reason of their
hardness. And because their coherence is not firm, as soon as the
external hard particles are disjoined, the ethereal parts will
necessarily break out, and so the body will suddenly be broken.

[Sidenote: Diaphanous and opacous, what they are, and whence.]

13. Those bodies are called _diaphanous_, upon which, whilst the beams
of a lucid body do work, the action of every one of those beams is
propagated in them in such manner, as that they still retain the same
order amongst themselves, or the inversion of that order; and therefore
bodies, which are perfectly diaphanous, are also perfectly homogeneous.
On the contrary, an _opacous_ body is that, which, by reason of its
heterogeneous nature, doth by innumerable reflections and refractions in
particles of different figures and unequal hardness, weaken the beams
that fall upon it before they reach the eye. And of diaphanous bodies,
some are made such by nature from the beginning; as the substance of the
air, and of the water, and perhaps also some parts of stones, unless
these also be water that has been long congealed. Others are made so by
the power of heat, which congregates homogeneous bodies. But such, as
are made diaphanous in this manner, consist of parts which were formerly
diaphanous.

[Sidenote: The cause of lightning and thunder.]

14. In what manner clouds are made by the motion of the sun, elevating
the particles of water from the sea and other moist places, hath been
explained in chapter XXVI. Also how clouds come to be frozen, hath been
shown above at the 7th article. Now from this, that air may be enclosed
as it were in caverns, and pent together more and more by the meeting of
ascending and descending clouds, may be deduced a possible cause of
_thunder_ and _lightning_. For seeing the air consists of two parts, the
one ethereal, which has no proper motion of its own, as being a thing
divisible into the least parts; the other hard, namely, consisting of
many hard atoms, which have every one of them a very swift simple motion
of its own: whilst the clouds by their meeting do more and more straiten
such cavities as they intercept, the ethereal parts will penetrate and
pass through their watery substance; but the hard parts will in the
meantime be the more thrust together, and press one another; and
consequently, by reason of their vehement motions, they will have an
endeavour to rebound from each other. Whensoever, therefore, the
compression is great enough, and the concave parts of the clouds are,
for the cause I have already given, congealed into ice, the cloud will
necessarily be broken; and this breaking of the cloud produceth the
first clap of thunder. Afterwards the air, which was pent in, having now
broken through, makes a concussion of the air without, and from hence
proceeds the roaring and murmur which follows; and both the first clap
and the murmur that follows it make that noise which is called
_thunder_. Also, from the same air breaking through the clouds and with
concussion falling upon the eye, proceeds that action upon our eye,
which causeth in us a perception of that light, which we call
_lightning_. Wherefore I have given a possible cause of thunder and
lightning.

[Sidenote: Whence it proceeds that clouds can fall again, after they are
           once elevated and frozen.]

15. But if the vapours, which are raised into clouds, do run together
again into water or be congealed into ice, from whence is it, seeing
both ice and water are heavy, that they are sustained in the air? Or
rather, what may the cause be, that being once elevated, they fall down
again? For there is no doubt but the same force which could carry up
that water, could also sustain it there. Why therefore being once
carried up, doth it fall again? I say it proceeds from the same simple
motion of the sun, both that vapours are forced to ascend, and that
water gathered into clouds is forced to descend. For in chapter XXI,
article 11, I have shown how vapours are elevated; and in the same
chapter, article 5, I have also shown how by the same motion homogeneous
bodies are congregated, and heterogeneous dissipated; that is to say,
how such things, as have a like nature to that of the earth, are driven
towards the earth; that is to say, what is the cause of the descent of
heavy bodies. Now if the action of the sun be hindered in the raising of
vapours, and be not at all hindered in the casting of them down, the
water will descend. But a cloud cannot hinder the action of the sun in
making things of an earthly nature descend to the earth, though it may
hinder it in making vapours ascend. For the lower part of a thick cloud
is so covered by its upper part, as that it cannot receive that action
of the sun by which vapours are carried up; because vapours are raised
by the perpetual fermentation of the air, or by the separating of its
smallest parts from one another, which is much weaker when a thick cloud
is interposed, than when the sky is clear. And therefore, whensoever a
cloud is made thick enough, the water, which would not descend before,
will then descend, unless it be kept up by the agitation of the wind.
Wherefore I have rendered a possible cause, both why the clouds may be
sustained in the air, and also why they may fall down again to the
earth; which was propounded to be done.

[Sidenote: How it could be that the moon was eclipsed, when she was not
           diametrically opposite to the sun.]

16. Granting that the clouds may be frozen, it is no wonder if the moon
have been seen eclipsed at such time as she hath been almost two degrees
above the horizon, the sun at the same time appearing in the horizon;
for such an eclipse was observed by Mæstlin, at Tubingen, in the year
1590. For it might happen that a frozen cloud was then interposed
between the sun and the eye of the observer. And if it were so, the sun,
which was then almost two degrees below the horizon, might appear to be
in it, by reason of the passing of his beams through the ice. And it is
to be noted that those, that attribute such refractions to the
atmosphere, cannot attribute to it so great a refraction as this.
Wherefore not the atmosphere, but either water in a continued body, or
else ice, must be the cause of that refraction.

[Sidenote: By what means many suns may appear at once.]

17. Again, granting that there may be ice in the clouds, it will be no
longer a wonder that many suns have sometimes appeared at once. For
looking-glasses may be so placed, as by reflections to show the same
object in many places. And may not so many frozen clouds serve for so
many looking-glasses? And may they not be fitly disposed for that
purpose? Besides, the number of appearances may be increased by
refractions also; and therefore it would be a greater wonder to me, if
such phenomena as these should never happen.

And were it not for that one phenomenon of the new star which was seen
in Cassiopea, I should think comets were made in the same manner,
namely, by vapours drawn not only from the earth but from the rest of
the planets also, and congealed into one continued body. For I could
very well from hence give a reason both of their hair, and of their
motions. But seeing that star remained sixteen whole months in the same
place amongst the fixed stars, I cannot believe the matter of it was
ice. Wherefore I leave to others the disquisition of the cause of
comets; concerning which nothing that hath hitherto been published,
besides the bare histories of them, is worth considering.

[Sidenote: Of the heads of rivers.]

18. The heads of rivers may be deduced from rain-water, or from melted
snows, very easily; but from other causes, very hardly, or not at all.
For both rain-water and melted snows run down the descents of mountains;
and if they descend only by the outward superficies, the showers or
snows themselves may be accounted the springs or fountains; but if they
enter the earth and descend within it, then, wheresoever they break out,
there are their springs. And as these springs make small streams, so,
many small streams running together make rivers. Now, there was never
any spring found, but where the water which flowed to it, was either
further, or at least as far from the centre of the earth, as the spring
itself. And whereas it has been objected by a great philosopher, that in
the top of Mount Cenis, which parts Savoy from Piedmont, there springs a
river which runs down by Susa; it is not true. For there are above that
river, for two miles length, very high hills on both sides, which are
almost perpetually covered with snow; from which innumerable little
streams running down do manifestly supply that river with water
sufficient for its magnitude.


                                -------


                              CHAP. XXIX.

                  OF SOUND, ODOUR, SAVOUR, AND TOUCH.

1.. The definition of sound, and the distinctions of sounds.—2. The
    cause of the degrees of sounds.—3. The difference between sounds
    acute and grave.—4. The difference between clear and hoarse sounds,
    whence.—5. The sound of thunder and of a gun, whence it proceeds.—6.
    Whence it is that pipes, by blowing into them, have a clear
    sound.—7. Of reflected sound.—8. From whence it is that sound is
    uniform and lasting.—9. How sound may be helped and hindered by the
    wind.—10. Not only air, but other bodies how hard soever they be,
    convey sound.—11. The causes of grave and acute sounds, and of
    concent.—12. Phenomena for smelling.—13. The first organ and the
    generation of smelling.—14. How it is helped by heat and by
    wind.—15. Why such bodies are least smelt, which have least
    intermixture of air in them.—16. Why odorous things become more
    odorous by being bruised.—17. The first organ of tasting; and why
    some savours cause nauseousness.—18. The first organ of feeling; and
    how we come to the knowledge of such objects as are common to the
    touch and other senses.


[Sidenote: The definition of sound, and the distinction of sounds.]

1. SOUND _is sense generated by the action of the medium, when its
motion reacheth the ear and the rest of the organs of sense_. Now, the
motion of the medium is not the sound itself, but the cause of it. For
the phantasm which is made in us, that is to say, the reaction of the
organ, is properly that which we call _sound_.

The principal distinctions of sounds are these; first, that one sound is
stronger, another weaker. Secondly, that one is more grave, another more
acute. Thirdly, that one is clear, another hoarse. Fourthly, that one is
primary, another derivative. Fifthly, that one is uniform, another not.
Sixthly, that one is more durable, another less durable. Of all which
distinctions the members may be subdistinguished into parts
distinguishable almost infinitely. For the variety of sounds seems to be
not much less than that of colours.

As vision, so hearing is generated by the motion of the medium, but not
in the same manner. For sight is from pressure, that is, from an
endeavour; in which there is no perceptible progression of any of the
parts of the medium; but one part urging or thrusting on another
propagateth that action successively to any distance whatsoever; whereas
the motion of the medium, by which sound is made, is a stroke. For when
we hear, the drum of the ear, which is the first organ of hearing, is
stricken; and the drum being stricken, the _pia mater_ is also shaken,
and with it the arteries which are inserted into it; by which the action
being propagated to the heart itself, by the reaction of the heart a
phantasm is made which we call sound; and because the reaction tendeth
outwards, we think it is without.

[Sidenote: The cause of the degrees of sounds.]

2. And seeing the effects produced by motion are greater or less, not
only when the velocity is greater or less, but also when the body hath
greater or less magnitude though the velocity be the same; a sound may
be greater or less both these ways. And because neither the greatest nor
the least magnitude or velocity can be given, it may happen that either
the motion may be of so small velocity, or the body itself of so small
magnitude, as to produce no sound at all; or either of them may be so
great, as to take away the faculty of sense by hurting the organ.

From hence may be deduced possible causes of the strength and weakness
of sounds in the following phenomena.

The first whereof is this, that if a man speak through a trunk which
hath one end applied to the mouth of the speaker, and the other to the
ear of the hearer, the sound will come stronger than it would do through
the open air. And the cause, not only the possible, but the certain and
manifest cause is this, that the air which is moved by the first breath
and carried forwards in the trunk, is not diffused as it would be in the
open air, and is consequently brought to the ear almost with the same
velocity with which it was first breathed out. Whereas, in the open air,
the first motion diffuseth itself every way into circles, such as are
made by the throwing of a stone into a standing water, where the
velocity grows less and less as the undulation proceeds further and
further from the beginning of its motion.

The second is this, that if the trunk be short, and the end which is
applied to the mouth be wider than that which is applied to the ear,
thus also the sound will be stronger than if it were made in the open
air. And the cause is the same, namely, that by how much the wider end
of the trunk is less distant from the beginning of the sound, by so much
the less is the diffusion.

The third, that it is easier for one, that is within a chamber, to hear
what is spoken without, than for him, that stands without, to hear what
is spoken within. For the windows and other inlets of the moved air are
as the wide end of the trunk. And for this reason some creatures seem to
hear the better, because nature has bestowed upon them wide and
capacious ears.

The fourth is this, that though he, which standeth upon the sea-shore,
cannot hear the collision of the two nearest waves, yet nevertheless he
hears the roaring of the whole sea. And the cause seems to be this, that
though the several collisions move the organ, yet they are not severally
great enough to cause sense; whereas nothing hinders but that all of
them together may make sound.

[Sidenote: The difference between sounds acute and grave.]

3. That bodies when they are stricken do yield some a more grave, others
a more acute sound, the cause may consist in the difference of the times
in which the parts stricken and forced out of their places return to the
same places again. For in some bodies, the restitution of the moved
parts is quick, in others slow. And this also may be the cause, why the
parts of the organ, which are moved by the medium, return to their rest
again, sometimes sooner, sometimes later. Now, by how much the
vibrations or the reciprocal motions of the parts are more frequent, by
so much doth the whole sound made at the same time by one stroke consist
of more, and consequently of smaller parts. For what is acute in sound,
the same is subtle in matter; and both of them, namely acute sound and
subtle matter, consist of very small parts, that of time, and this of
the matter itself.

The third distinction of sounds cannot be conceived clearly enough by
the names I have used of _clear_ and _hoarse_, nor by any other that I
know; and therefore it is needful to explain them by examples. When I
say hoarse, I understand whispering and hissing, and whatsoever is like
to these, by what appellation soever it be expressed. And sounds of this
kind seem to be made by the force of some strong wind, raking rather
than striking such hard bodies as it falls upon. On the contrary, when I
use the word clear, I do not understand such a sound as may be easily
and distinctly heard; for so whispers would be clear; but such as is
made by somewhat that is broken, and such as is clamour, tinkling, the
sound of a trumpet, &c. and to express it significantly in one word,
noise. And seeing no sound is made but by the concourse of two bodies at
the least, by which concourse it is necessary that there be as well
reaction as action, that is to say, one motion opposite to another; it
follows that according as the proportion between those two opposite
motions is diversified, so the sounds which are made will be different
from one another. And whensoever the proportion between them is so
great, as that the motion of one of the bodies be insensible if compared
with the motion of the other, then the sound will not be of the same
kind; as when the wind falls very obliquely upon a hard body, or when a
hard body is carried swiftly through the air; for then there is made
that sound which I call a hoarse sound, in Greek συριγμος. Therefore the
breath blown with violence from the mouth makes a hissing, because in
going out it rakes the superficies of the lips, whose reaction against
the force of the breath is not sensible. And this is the cause why the
winds have that hoarse sound. Also if two bodies, how hard soever, be
rubbed together with no great pressure, they make a hoarse sound. And
this hoarse sound, when it is made, as I have said, by the air raking
the superficies of a hard body, seemeth to be nothing but the dividing
of the air into innumerable and very small files. For the asperity of
the superficies doth, by the eminences of its innumerable parts, divide
or cut in pieces the air that slides upon it.

[Sidenote: The difference between clear & hoarse sounds, whence.]

4. _Noise_, or that which I call clear sound, is made two ways; one, by
two hoarse sounds made by opposite motions; the other, by collision, or
by the sudden pulling asunder of two bodies, whereby their small
particles are put into commotion, or being already in commotion suddenly
restore themselves again; which motion, making impression upon the
medium, is propagated to the organ of hearing. And seeing there is in
this collision or divulsion an endeavour in the particles of one body,
opposite to the endeavour of the particles of the other body, there will
also be made in the organ of hearing a like opposition of endeavours,
that is to say, of motions; and consequently the sound arising from
thence will be made by two opposite motions, that is to say, by two
opposite hoarse sounds in one and the same part of the organ. For, as I
have already said, a hoarse sound supposeth the sensible motion of but
one of the bodies. And this opposition of motions in the organ is the
cause why two bodies make a noise, when they are either suddenly
stricken against one another, or suddenly broken asunder.

[Sidenote: The sound of thunder and of a gun, whence it proceeds.]

5. This being granted, and seeing withal that thunder is made by the
vehement eruption of the air out of the cavities of congealed clouds,
the cause of the great noise or clap may be the sudden breaking asunder
of the ice. For in this action it is necessary that there be not only a
great concussion of the small particles of the broken parts, but also
that this concussion, by being communicated to the air, be carried to
the organ of hearing, and make impression upon it. And then, from the
first reaction of the organ proceeds that first and greatest sound,
which is made by the collision of the parts whilst they restore
themselves. And seeing there is in all concussion a reciprocation of
motion forwards and backwards in the parts stricken; for opposite
motions cannot extinguish one another in an instant, as I have shown in
the 11th article of chapter VIII; it follows necessarily that the sound
will both continue, and grow weaker and weaker, till at last the action
of the reciprocating air grow so weak, as to be imperceptible. Wherefore
a possible cause is given both of the first fierce noise of the thunder,
and also of the murmur that follows it.

The cause of the great sound from a discharged piece of ordnance is like
that of a clap of thunder. For the gunpowder being fired doth, in its
endeavour to go out, attempt every way the sides of the metal in such
manner, as that it enlargeth the circumference all along, and withal
shorteneth the axis; so that whilst the piece of ordnance is in
discharging, it is made both wider and shorter than it was before; and
therefore also presently after it is discharged its wideness will be
diminished, and its length increased again by the restitution of all the
particles of the matter, of which it consisteth, to their former
position. And this is done with such motions of the parts, as are not
only very vehement, but also opposite to one another; which motions,
being communicated to the air, make impression upon the organ, and by
the reaction of the organ create a sound, which lasteth for some time;
as I have already shown in this article.

I note by the way, as not belonging to this place, that the possible
cause why a gun recoils when it is shot off, may be this; that being
first swollen by the force of the fire, and afterwards restoring itself,
from this restitution there proceeds an endeavour from all the sides
towards the cavity; and consequently this endeavour is in those parts
which are next the breech; which being not hollow, but solid, the effect
of the restitution is by it hindered and diverted into the length; and
by this means both the breech and the whole gun is thrust backwards; and
the more forcibly by how much the force is greater, by which the part
next the breech is restored to its former posture, that is to say, by
how much the thinner is that part. The cause, therefore, why guns
recoil, some more some less, is the difference of their thickness
towards the breech; and the greater that thickness is, the less they
recoil; and contrarily.

[Sidenote: Whence it is that pipes, by blowing into them, have a clear
           sound.]

6. Also the cause why the sound of a pipe, which is made by blowing into
it, is nevertheless clear, is the same with that of the sound which is
made by collision. For if the breath, when it is blown into a pipe, do
only rake its concave superficies, or fall upon it with a very sharp
angle of incidence, the sound will not be clear, but hoarse. But if the
angle be great enough, the percussion, which is made against one of the
hollow sides, will be reverberated to the opposite side; and so
successive repercussions will be made from side to side, till at last
the whole concave superficies of the pipe be put into motion; which
motion will be reciprocated, as it is in collision; and this
reciprocation being propagated to the organ, from the reaction of the
organ will arise a clear sound, such as is made by collision, or by
breaking asunder of hard bodies.

In the same manner it is with the sound of a man's voice. For when the
breath passeth out without interruption, and doth but lightly touch the
cavities through which it is sent, the sound it maketh is a hoarse
sound. But if in going out it strike strongly upon the _larynx_, then a
clear sound is made, as in a pipe. And the same breath, as it comes in
divers manners to the palate, the tongue, the lips, the teeth, and other
organs of speech, so the sounds into which it is articulated become
different from one another.

[Sidenote: Of reflected sound.]

7. I call that _primary sound_, which is generated by motion from the
sounding body to the organ in a strait line without reflection; and I
call that _reflected sound_, which is generated by one or more
reflections, being the same with that we call _echo_, and is iterated as
often as there are reflections made from the object to the ear. And
these reflections are made by hills, walls, and other resisting bodies,
so placed as that they make more or fewer reflections of the motion,
according as they are themselves more or fewer in number; and they make
them more or less frequently, according as they are more or less distant
from one another. Now the cause of both these things is to be sought for
in the situation of the reflecting bodies, as is usually done in sight.
For the laws of reflection are the same in both, namely, that the angles
of incidence and reflection be equal to one another. If, therefore, in a
hollow elliptic body, whose inside is well polished, or in two right
parabolical solids, which are joined together by one common base, there
be placed a sounding body in one of the burning points, and the ear in
the other, there will be heard a sound by many degrees greater than in
the open air; and both this, and the burning of such combustible things,
as being put in the same places are set on fire by the sun-beams, are
effects of one and the same cause. But, as when the visible object is
placed in one of the burning points, it is not distinctly seen in the
other, because every part of the object being seen in every line, which
is reflected from the concave superficies to the eye, makes a confusion
in the sight; so neither is sound heard articulately and distinctly when
it comes to the ear in all those reflected lines. And this may be the
reason why in churches which have arched roofs, though they be neither
elliptical nor parabolical, yet because their figure is not much
different from these, the voice from the pulpit will not be heard so
articulately as it would be, if there were no vaulting at all.

[Sidenote: From whence it is that sound is uniform and lasting.]

8. Concerning the _uniformity_ and _duration_ of sounds, both which have
one common cause, we may observe, that such bodies as being stricken
yield an unequal or harsh sound, are very heterogeneous, that is to say,
they consist of parts which are very unlike both in figure and hardness,
such as are wood, stones, and others not a few. When these are stricken,
there follows a concussion of their internal particles, and a
restitution of them again. But they are neither moved alike, nor have
they the same action upon one another; some of them recoiling from the
stroke, whilst others which have already finished their recoilings are
now returning; by which means they hinder and stop one another. And from
hence it is that their motions are not only unequal and harsh, but also
that their reciprocations come to be quickly extinguished. Whensoever,
therefore, this motion is propagated to the ear, the sound it makes is
unequal and of small duration. On the contrary, if a body that is
stricken be not only sufficiently hard, but have also the particles of
which it consisteth like to one another both in hardness and figure,
such as are the particles of glass and metals, which being first melted
do afterwards settle and harden; the sound it yieldeth will, because the
motions of its parts and their reciprocations are like and uniform, be
uniform and pleasant, and be more or less lasting, according as the body
stricken hath greater or less magnitude. The possible cause, therefore,
of sounds uniform and harsh, and of their longer or shorter duration,
may be one and the same likeness and unlikeness of the internal parts of
the sounding body, in respect both of their figure and hardness.

Besides, if two plane bodies of the same matter and of equal thickness,
do both yield an uniform sound, the sound of that body, which hath the
greatest extent of length, will be the longest heard. For the motion,
which in both of them hath its beginning from the point of percussion,
is to be propagated in the greater body through a greater space, and
consequently that propagation will require more time; and therefore also
the parts which are moved, will require more time for their return.
Wherefore all the reciprocations cannot be finished but in longer time;
and being carried to the ear, will make the sound last the longer. And
from hence it is manifest, that of hard bodies which yield an uniform
sound, the sound lasteth longer which comes from those that are round
and hollow, than from those that are plane, if they be like in all other
respects. For in circular lines the action, which begins at any point,
hath not from the figure any end of its propagation, because the line in
which it is propagated returns again to its beginning; so that the
figure hinders not but that the motion may have infinite progression.
Whereas in a plane, every line hath its magnitude finite, beyond which
the action cannot proceed. If, therefore, the matter be the same, the
motion of the parts of that body whose figure is round and hollow, will
last longer than of that which is plane.

Also, if a string which is stretched be fastened at both ends to a
hollow body, and be stricken, the sound will last longer than if it were
not so fastened; because the trembling or reciprocation which it
receives from the stroke, is by reason of the connection communicated to
the hollow body; and this trembling, if the hollow body be great, will
last the longer by reason of that greatness. Wherefore also, for the
reason above mentioned, the sound will last the longer.

[Sidenote: How sound may be helped and hindered by the wind.]

9. In hearing it happens, otherwise than in seeing, that the action of
the medium is made stronger by the wind when it blows the same way, and
weaker when it blows the contrary way. The cause whereof cannot proceed
from anything but the different generation of sound and light. For in
the generation of light, none of the parts of the medium between the
object and the eye are moved from their own places to other places
sensibly distant; but the action is propagated in spaces imperceptible;
so that no contrary wind can diminish, nor favourable wind encrease the
light, unless it be so strong as to remove the object further off or
bring it nearer to the eye. For the wind, that is to say the air moved,
doth not by its interposition between the object and the eye work
otherwise than it would do, if it were still and calm. For, where the
pressure is perpetual, one part of the air is no sooner carried away,
but another, by succeeding it, receives the same impression, which the
part carried away had received before. But in the generation of sound,
the first collision or breaking asunder beateth away and driveth out of
its place the nearest part of the air, and that to a considerable
distance, and with considerable velocity; and as the circles grow by
their remoteness wider and wider, so the air being more and more
dissipated, hath also its motion more and more weakened. Whensoever
therefore the air is so stricken as to cause sound, if the wind fall
upon it, it will move it all nearer to the ear, if it blow that way, and
further from it if it blow the contrary way; so that according as it
blows from or towards the object, so the sound which is heard will seem
to come from a nearer or remoter place; and the reaction, by reason of
the unequal distances, be strengthened or debilitated.

From hence may be understood the reason why the voice of such as are
said to speak in their bellies, though it be uttered near hand, is
nevertheless heard, by those that suspect nothing, as if it were a great
way off. For having no former thought of any determined place from which
the voice should proceed, and judging according to the greatness, if it
be weak they think it a great way off, if strong near. These
ventriloqui, therefore, by forming their voice, not as others by the
emission of their breath, but by drawing it inwards, do make the same
appear small and weak; which weakness of the voice deceives those, that
neither suspect the artifice nor observe the endeavour which they use in
speaking; and so, instead of thinking it weak, they think it far off.

[Sidenote: Not only air, but other bodies, how hard soever they be,
           convey sound.]

10. As for the medium, which conveys sound, it is not air only. For
water, or any other body how hard soever, may be that medium. For the
motion may be propagated perpetually in any hard continuous body; but by
reason of the difficulty, with which the parts of hard bodies are moved,
the motion in going out of hard matter makes but a weak impression upon
the air. Nevertheless, if one end of a very long and hard beam be
stricken, and the ear be applied at the same time to the other end, so
that, when the action goeth out of the beam, the air, which it striketh,
may immediately be received by the ear, and be carried to the tympanum,
the sound will be considerably strong.

In like manner, if in the night, when all other noise which may hinder
sound ceaseth, a man lay his ear to the ground, he will hear the sound
of the steps of passengers, though at a great distance; because the
motion, which by their treading they communicate to the earth, is
propagated to the ear by the uppermost parts of the earth which
receiveth it from their feet.

[Sidenote: The causes of grave and acute sounds, and of concent.]

11. I have shown above, that the difference between grave and acute
sounds consisteth in this, that by how much the shorter the time is, in
which the reciprocations of the parts of a body stricken are made, by so
much the more acute will be the sound. Now by how much a body of the
same bigness is either more heavy or less stretched, by so much the
longer will the reciprocations last; and therefore heavier and less
stretched bodies, if they be like in all other respects, will yield a
graver sound than such as be lighter and more stretched.

As for the concent of sounds, it is to be considered that the
reciprocation or vibration of the air, by which sound is made, after it
hath reached the drum of the ear, imprinteth a like vibration upon the
air that is inclosed within it; by which means the sides of the drum
within are stricken alternately. Now the concent of two sounds consists
in this, that the tympanum receives its sounding stroke from both the
sounding bodies in equal and equally frequent spaces of time; so that
when two strings make their vibrations in the same times, the concent
they produce is the most exquisite of all other. For the sides of the
tympanum, that is to say of the organ of hearing, will be stricken by
both those vibrations together at once, on one side or other. For
example, if the two equal strings A B and C D be stricken together, and
the latitudes of their vibrations E F and G H be also equal, and the
points E, G, F and H be in the concave superficies of the tympanum, so
that it receive strokes from both the strings together in E and G, and
again together in F and H, the sound, which is made by the vibrations of
each string, will be so like, that it may be taken for the same sound,
and is called _unison_; which is the greatest concord. Again, the string
A B retaining still its former vibration E F, let the string C D be
stretched till its vibration have double the swiftness it had before,
and let E F be divided equally in I. In what time therefore the string C
D makes one part of its vibration from G to H, in the same time the
string A B will make one part of its vibration from E to I; and in what
time the string C D hath made the other part of its vibration back from
H to G, in the same time another part of the vibration of the string A B
will be made from I to F. But the points F and G are both in the sides
of the organ, and therefore they will strike the organ both together,
not at every stroke, but at every other stroke. And this is the nearest
concord to unison, and makes that sound which is called an _eighth_.
Again, the vibration of the string A B remaining still the same it was,
let C D be stretched till its vibration be swifter than that of the
string A B in the proportion of 3 to 2, and let E F be divided into
three equal parts in K and L. In what time therefore the string C D
makes one third part of its vibration, which third part is from G to H,
the string A B will make one third part of its vibration, that is to
say, two-thirds of E F, namely, E L. And in what time the string C D
makes another third part of its vibration, namely H G, the string A B
will make another third part of its vibration, namely from L to F, and
back again from F to L. Lastly, whilst the string C D makes the last
third part of its vibration, that is from G to H, the string A B will
make the last third part of its vibration from L to E. But the points E
and H are both in the sides of the organ. Wherefore, at every third
time, the organ will be stricken by the vibration of both the strings
together, and make that concord which is called a _fifth_.

                               A-------B
                               C-------D
                                 G   E
                                 |   |
                                 |   | K
                                 |   |
                                 |   | I
                                 |   |
                                 |   | L
                                 |   |
                                 H   F

[Sidenote: Phenomena of smelling.]

12. For the finding out the cause of _smells_, I shall make use of the
evidence of these following phenomena. First, that smelling is hindered
by cold, and helped by heat. Secondly, that when the wind bloweth from
the object, the smell is the stronger; and, contrarily, when it bloweth
from the sentient towards the object, the weaker; both which phenomena
are, by experience, manifestly found to be true in dogs, which follow
the track of beasts by the scent. Thirdly, that such bodies, as are less
pervious to the fluid medium, yield less smell than such as are more
pervious; as may be seen in stones and metals, which, compared with
plants and living creatures, and their parts, fruits and excretions,
have very little or no smell at all. Fourthly, that such bodies, as are
of their own nature odorous, become yet more odorous when they are
bruised. Fifthly, that when the breath is stopped, at least in men,
nothing can be smelt. Sixthly, that the sense of smelling is also taken
away by the stopping of the nostrils, though the mouth be left open.

[Sidenote: The first organ and the generation of smelling.]

13. By the fifth and sixth phenomenon it is manifest, that the first and
immediate organ of smelling is the innermost cuticle of the nostrils,
and that part of it, which is below the passage common to the nostrils
and the palate. For when we draw breath by the nostrils we draw it into
the lungs. That breath, therefore, which conveys smells is in the way
which passeth to the lungs, that is to say, in that part of the nostrils
which is below the passage through which the breath goeth. For, nothing
is smelt, neither beyond the passage of the breath within, nor at all
without the nostrils.

And seeing that from different smells there must necessarily proceed
some mutation in the organ, and all mutation is motion; it is therefore
also necessary that, in smelling, the parts of the organ, that is to say
of that internal cuticle and the nerves that are inserted into it, must
be diversely moved by different smells. And seeing also, that it hath
been demonstrated, that nothing can be moved but by a body that is
already moved and contiguous; and that there is no other body contiguous
to the internal membrane of the nostrils but breath, that is to say
attracted air, and such little solid invisible bodies, if there be any
such, as are intermingled with the air; it follows necessarily, that the
cause of smelling is either the motion of that pure air or ethereal
substance, or the motion of those small bodies. But this motion is an
effect proceeding from the object of smell, and, therefore, either the
whole object itself or its several parts must necessarily be moved. Now,
we know that odorous bodies make odour, though their whole bulk be not
moved. Wherefore the cause of odour is the motion of the invisible parts
of the odorous body. And these invisible parts do either go out of the
object, or else, retaining their former situation with the rest of the
parts, are moved together with them, that is to say, they have simple
and invisible motion. They that say, there goes something out of the
odorous body, call it an effluvium; which effluvium is either of the
ethereal substance, or of the small bodies that are intermingled with
it. But, that all variety of odours should proceed from the effluvia of
those small bodies that are intermingled with the ethereal substance, is
altogether incredible, for these considerations; first, that certain
unguents, though very little in quantity, do nevertheless send forth
very strong odours, not only to a great distance of place, but also for
a great continuance of time, and are to be smelt in every point both of
that place and time; so that the parts issued out are sufficient to fill
ten thousand times more space, than the whole odorous body is able to
fill; which is impossible. Secondly, that whether that issuing out be
with strait or with crooked motion, if the same quantity should flow
from any other odorous body with the same motion, it would follow that
all odorous bodies would yield the same smell. Thirdly, that seeing
those effluvia have great velocity of motion (as is manifest from this,
that noisome odours proceeding from caverns are presently smelt at a
great distance) it would follow, that, by reason there is nothing to
hinder the passage of those effluvia to the organ, such motion alone
were sufficient to cause smelling; which is not so; for we cannot smell
at all, unless we draw in our breath through our nostrils. Smelling,
therefore, is not caused by the effluvium of atoms; nor, for the same
reason, is it caused by the effluvium of ethereal substance; for so also
we should smell without the drawing in of our breath. Besides, the
ethereal substance being the same in all odorous bodies, they would
always affect the organ in the same manner; and, consequently, the
odours of all things would be alike.

It remains, therefore, that the cause of smelling must consist in the
simple motion of the parts of odorous bodies without any efflux or
diminution of their whole substance. And by this motion there is
propagated to the organ, by the intermediate air, the like motion, but
not strong enough to excite sense of itself without the attraction of
air by respiration. And this is a possible cause of smelling.

[Sidenote: How smelling is helped by heat and by wind.]

14. The cause why smelling is hindered by cold and helped by heat may be
this; that heat, as hath been shown in chapter XXI, generateth simple
motion; and therefore also, wheresoever it is already, there it will
increase it; and the cause of smelling being increased, the smell itself
will also be increased. As for the cause why the wind blowing from the
object makes the smell the stronger, it is all one with that for which
the attraction of air in respiration doth the same. For, he that draws
in the air next to him, draws with it by succession that air in which is
the object. Now, this motion of the air is wind, and, when another wind
bloweth from the object, will be increased by it.

[Sidenote: Why such bodies are least smelt, which have the least
           intermixture of air in them.]

15. That bodies which contain the least quantity of air, as stones and
metals, yield less smell than plants and living creatures; the cause may
be, that the motion, which causeth smelling, is a motion of the fluid
parts only; which parts, if they have any motion from the hard parts in
which they are contained, they communicate the same to the open air, by
which it is propagated to the organ. Where, therefore, there are no
fluid parts as in metals, or where the fluid parts receive no motion
from the hard parts, as in stones, which are made hard by accretion,
there can be no smell. And therefore also the water, whose parts have
little or no motion, yieldeth no smell. But, if the same water, by seeds
and the heat of the sun, be together with particles of earth raised into
a plant, and be afterwards pressed out again, it will be odorous, as
wine from the vine. And as water passing through plants is by the motion
of the parts of those plants made an odorous liquor; so also of air,
passing through the same plants whilst they are growing, are made
odorous airs. And thus also it is with the juices and spirits, which are
bred in living creatures.

[Sidenote: Why odorous things become more odorous, when bruised.]

16. That odorous bodies may be made more odorous by contrition proceeds
from this, that being broken into many parts, which are all odorous, the
air, which by respiration is drawn from the object towards the organ,
doth in its passage touch upon all those parts, and receive their
motion. Now, the air toucheth the superficies only; and a body having
less superficies whilst it is whole, than all its parts together have
after it is reduced to powder, it follows that the same odorous body
yieldeth less smell whilst it is whole, than it will do after it is
broken into smaller parts. And thus much of smells.

[Sidenote: The first organ of tasting; and why some savours cause
           nauseousness.]

17. The taste follows; whose generation hath this difference from that
of the sight, hearing, and smelling, that by these we have sense of
remote objects; whereas, we taste nothing but what is contiguous, and
doth immediately touch either the tongue or palate, or both. From whence
it is evident, that the cuticles of the tongue and palate, and the
nerves inserted into them are the first organ of taste; and (because
from the concussion of the parts of these, there followeth necessarily a
concussion of the _pia mater_) that the action communicated to these is
propagated to the brain, and from thence to the farthest organ, namely,
the heart, in whose reaction consisteth the nature of sense.

Now, that savours, as well as odours, do not only move the brain but the
stomach also, as is manifest by the loathings that are caused by them
both; they, that consider the organ of both these senses, will not
wonder at all; seeing the tongue, the palate and the nostrils, have one
and the same continued cuticle, derived from the _dura mater_.

And that effluvia have nothing to do in the sense of tasting, is
manifest from this, that there is no taste where the organ and the
object are not contiguous.

By what variety of motions the different kinds of tastes, which are
innumerable, may be distinguished, I know not. I might with others
derive them from the divers figures of those atoms, of which whatsoever
may be tasted consisteth; or from the diverse motions which I might, by
way of supposition, attribute to those atoms; conjecturing, not without
some likelihood of truth, that such things as taste sweet have their
particles moved with slow circular motion, and their figures spherical;
which makes them smooth and pleasing to the organ; that bitter things
have circular motion, but vehement, and their figures full of angles, by
which they trouble the organ; and that sour things have strait and
reciprocal motion, and their figures long and small, so that they cut
and wound the organ. And in like manner I might assign for the causes of
other tastes such several motions and figures of atoms, as might in
probability seem to be the true causes. But this would be to revolt from
philosophy to divination.

[Sidenote: The first organ of feeling; and how we came to the knowledge
           of such objects as are common to the touch and to other
           senses.]

18. By the _touch_, we feel what bodies are cold or hot, though they be
distant from us. Others, as hard, soft, rough, and smooth, we cannot
feel unless they be contiguous. The organ of touch is every one of those
membranes, which being continued from the _pia mater_ are so diffused
throughout the whole body, as that no part of it can be pressed, but the
_pia mater_ is pressed together with it. Whatsoever therefore presseth
it, is felt as hard or soft, that is to say, as more or less hard. And
as for the sense of rough, it is nothing else but innumerable
perceptions of hard and hard succeeding one another by short intervals
both of time and place. For we take notice of rough and smooth, as also
of magnitude and figure, not only by the touch, but also by memory. For
though some things are touched in one point, yet rough and smooth, like
quantity and figure, are not perceived but by the flux of a point, that
is to say, we have no sense of them without time; and we can have no
sense of time without memory.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XXX.

                              OF GRAVITY.

1. A thick body doth not contain more matter, unless also more place,
    than a thin.—2. That the descent of heavy bodies proceeds not from
    their own appetite, but from some power of the earth.—3. The
    difference of gravities proceedeth from the difference of the
    impetus with which the elements, whereof heavy bodies are made, do
    fall upon the earth.—4. The cause of the descent of heavy bodies.—5.
    In what proportion the descent of heavy bodies is accelerated.—6.
    Why those that dive do not, when they are under water, feel the
    weight of the water above them.—7. The weight of a body that
    floateth, is equal to the weight of so much water as would fill the
    space, which the immersed part of the body takes up within the
    water.—8. If a body be lighter than water, then how big soever that
    body be, it may float upon any quantity of water, how little
    soever.—9. How water may be lifted up and forced out of a vessel by
    air.—10. Why a bladder is heavier when blown full of air, than when
    it is empty.—11. The cause of the ejection upwards of heavy bodies
    from a wind-gun.—12. The cause of the ascent of water in a
    weather-glass.—13. The cause of motion upwards in living
    creatures.—14. That there is in nature a kind of body heavier than
    air, which nevertheless is not by sense distinguishable from it.—15.
    Of the cause of magnetical virtue.


[Sidenote: A thick body doth not contain more matter, unless also more
           place, than a thin.]

1. In chapter XXI I have defined thick and thin, as that place required,
so, as that by thick was signified a more resisting body, and by thin, a
body less resisting; following the custom of those that have before me
discoursed of refraction. Now if we consider the true and vulgar
signification of those words, we shall find them to be names collective,
that is to say, names of multitude; as _thick_ to be that, which takes
up more parts of a space given, and _thin_ that, which contains fewer
parts of the same magnitude in the same space, or in a space equal to
it. Thick therefore is the same with frequent, as a thick troop; and
thin the same with unfrequent, as a thin rank, thin of houses; not that
there is more matter in one place than in another equal place, but a
greater quantity of some named body. For there is not less matter or
body, indefinitely taken, in a desert, than there is in a city; but
fewer houses, or fewer men. Nor is there in a thick rank a greater
quantity of body, but a greater number of soldiers, than in a thin.
Wherefore the multitude and paucity of the parts contained within the
same space do constitute density and rarity, whether those parts be
separated by vacuum or by air. But the consideration of this is not of
any great moment in philosophy; and therefore I let it alone, and pass
on to the search of the causes of _gravity_.

[Sidenote: That the descent of heavy bodies proceeds not from their own
           appetite, but from some power of the earth.]

2. Now we call those bodies _heavy_, which, unless they be hindered by
some force, are carried towards the centre of the earth, and that by
their own accord, for aught we can by sense perceive to the contrary.
Some philosophers therefore have been of opinion, that the descent of
heavy bodies proceeded from some internal appetite, by which, when they
were cast upwards, they descended again, as moved by themselves, to such
place as was agreeable to their nature. Others thought they were
attracted by the earth. To the former I cannot assent, because I think I
have already clearly enough demonstrated that there can be no beginning
of motion, but from an external and moved body; and consequently, that
whatsoever hath motion or endeavour towards any place, will always move
or endeavour towards that same place, unless it be hindered by the
reaction of some external body. Heavy bodies, therefore, being once cast
upwards, cannot be cast down again but by external motion. Besides,
seeing inanimate bodies have no appetite at all, it is ridiculous to
think that by their own innate appetite they should, to preserve
themselves, not understanding what preserves them, forsake the place
they are in, and transfer themselves to another place; whereas man, who
hath both appetite and understanding, cannot, for the preservation of
his own life, raise himself by leaping above three or four feet from the
ground. Lastly, to attribute to created bodies the power to move
themselves, what is it else than to say that there be creatures which
have no dependance upon the Creator? To the latter, who attribute the
descent of heavy bodies to the attraction of the earth, I assent. But by
what motion this is done, hath not as yet been explained by any man. I
shall therefore in this place say somewhat of the manner and of the way
by which the earth by its action attracteth heavy bodies.

[Sidenote: The difference of gravities proceedeth from the difference of
           the impetus with which the elements, whereof heavy bodies are
           made, do fall upon the earth.]

3. That by the supposition of simple motion in the sun, homogeneous
bodies are congregated and heterogeneous dissipated, has already been
demonstrated in the 5th article of chapter XXI. I have also supposed,
that there are intermingled with the pure air certain little bodies, or,
as others call them, atoms; which by reason of their extreme smallness
are invisible, and differing from one another in consistence, figure,
motion, and magnitude; from whence it comes to pass that some of them
are congregated to the earth, others to other planets, and others are
carried up and down in the spaces between. And seeing those, which are
carried to the earth, differ from one another in figure, motion, and
magnitude, they will fall upon the earth, some with greater, others with
less impetus. And seeing also that we compute the several degrees of
gravity no otherwise than by this their falling upon the earth with
greater or less impetus; it follows, that we conclude those to be the
more heavy that have the greater impetus, and those to be less heavy
that have the less impetus. Our inquiry therefore must be, by what means
it may come to pass, that of bodies, which descend from above to the
earth, some are carried with greater, others with less impetus; that is
to say, some are more heavy than others. We must also inquire, by what
means such bodies, as settle upon the earth, may by the earth itself be
forced to ascend.

[Sidenote: The cause of the descent of heavy bodies.]

4. Let the circle made upon the centre C (in fig. 2) be a great circle
in the superficies of the earth, passing through the points A and B.
Also let any heavy body, as the stone A D, be placed anywhere in the
plane of the equator; and let it be conceived to be cast up from A D
perpendicularly, or to be carried in any other line to E, and supposed
to rest there. Therefore, how much space soever the stone took up in A
D, so much space it takes up now in E. And because all place is supposed
to be full, the space A D will be filled by the air which flows into it
first from the nearest places of the earth, and afterwards successively
from more remote places. Upon the centre C let a circle be understood to
be drawn through E; and let the plane space, which is between the
superficies of the earth and that circle, be divided into plane orbs
equal and concentric; of which let that be the first, which is contained
by the two perimeters that pass through A and D. Whilst therefore the
air, which is in the first orb, filleth the place A D, the orb itself is
made so much less, and consequently its latitude is less than the strait
line A D. Wherefore there will necessarily descend so much air from the
orb next above. In like manner, for the same cause, there will also be a
descent of air from the orb next above that; and so by succession from
the orb in which the stone is at rest in E. Either therefore the stone
itself, or so much air, will descend. And seeing air is by the diurnal
revolution of the earth more easily thrust away than the stone, the air,
which is in the orb that contains the stone, will be forced further
upwards than the stone. But this, without the admission of vacuum,
cannot be, unless so much air descend to E from the place next above;
which being done, the stone will be thrust downwards. By this means
therefore the stone now receives the beginning of its descent, that is
to say, of its gravity. Furthermore, whatsoever is once moved, will be
moved continually (as hath been shown in the 19th article of chapter
VIII) in the same way, and with the same celerity, except it be retarded
or accelerated by some external movent. Now the air, which is the only
body that is interposed between the earth A and the stone above it E,
will have the same action in every point of the strait line E A, which
it hath in E. But it depressed the stone in E; and therefore also it
will depress it equally in every point of the strait line E A. Wherefore
the stone will descend from E to A with accelerated motion. The possible
cause therefore of the descent of heavy bodies under the equator, is the
diurnal motion of the earth. And the same demonstration will serve, if
the stone be placed in the plane of any other circle parallel to the
equator. But because this motion hath, by reason of its greater
slowness, less force to thrust off the air in the parallel circles than
in the equator, and no force at all at the poles, it may well be thought
(for it is a certain consequent) that heavy bodies descend with less and
less velocity, as they are more and more remote from the equator; and
that at the poles themselves, they will either not descend at all, or
not descend by the axis; which whether it be true or false, experience
must determine. But it is hard to make the experiment, both because the
times of their descents cannot be easily measured with sufficient
exactness, and also because the places near the poles are inaccessible.
Nevertheless, this we know, that by how much the nearer we come to the
poles, by so much the greater are the flakes of the snow that falls; and
by how much the more swiftly such bodies descend as are fluid and
dissipable, by so much the smaller are the particles into which they are
dissipated.

[Sidenote: In what proportion the descent of heavy bodies is
           accelerated.]

5. Supposing, therefore, this to be the cause of the descent of heavy
bodies, it will follow that their motion will be accelerated in such
manner, as that the spaces, which are transmitted by them in the several
times, will have to one another the same proportion which the odd
numbers have in succession from unity. For if the strait line E A be
divided into any number of equal parts, the heavy body descending will,
by reason of the perpetual action of the diurnal motion, receive from
the air in every one of those times, in every several point of the
strait line E A, a several new and equal impulsion; and therefore also
in every one of those times, it will acquire a several and equal degree
of celerity. And from hence it follows, by that which Galileus hath in
his _Dialogues of Motion_ demonstrated, that heavy bodies descend in the
several times with such differences of transmitted spaces, as are equal
to the differences of the square numbers that succeed one another from
unity; which square numbers being 1, 4, 9, 16, &c. their differences are
3, 5, 7, &c.; that is to say, the odd numbers which succeed one another
from unity. Against this cause of gravity which I have given, it will
perhaps be objected, that if a heavy body be placed in the bottom of
some hollow cylinder of iron or adamant, and the bottom be turned
upwards, the body will descend, though the air above cannot depress it,
much less accelerate its motion. But it is to be considered that there
can be no cylinder or cavern, but such as is supported by the earth, and
being so supported is, together with the earth, carried about by its
diurnal motion. For by this means the bottom of the cylinder will be as
the superficies of the earth; and by thrusting off the next and lowest
air, will make the uppermost air depress the heavy body, which is at the
top of the cylinder, in such manner as is above explicated.

[Sidenote: Why those that dive, do not, when they are under water, feel
           the weight of the water above them.]

6. The gravity of water being so great as by experience we find it is,
the reason is demanded by many, why those that dive, how deep soever
they go under water, do not at all feel the weight of the water which
lies upon them. And the cause seems to be this, that all bodies by how
much the heavier they are, by so much the greater is the endeavour by
which they tend downwards. But the body of a man is heavier than so much
water as is equal to it in magnitude, and therefore the endeavour
downwards of a man's body is greater than that of water. And seeing all
endeavour is motion, the body also of a man will be carried towards the
bottom with greater velocity than so much water. Wherefore there is
greater reaction from the bottom; and the endeavour upwards is equal to
the endeavour downwards, whether the water be pressed by water, or by
another body which is heavier than water. And therefore by these two
opposite equal endeavours, the endeavour both ways in the water is taken
away; and consequently, those that dive are not at all pressed by it.

Coroll. From hence also it is manifest, that water in water hath no
weight at all, because all the parts of water, both the parts above, and
the parts that are directly under, tend towards the bottom with equal
endeavour and in the same strait lines.

[Sidenote: The weight of a body that floateth, is equal to the weight of
           so much water as would fill the space which the immersed part
           of the body takes up within the water.]

7. If a body float upon the water, the weight of that body is equal to
the weight of so much water as would fill the place which the immersed
part of the body takes up within the water.

Let E F (in fig. 3) be a body floating in the water A B C D; and let the
part E be above, and the other part F under the water. I say, the weight
of the whole body E F is equal to the weight of so much water as the
space F will receive. For seeing the weight of the body E F forceth the
water out of the space F, and placeth it upon the superficies A B, where
it presseth downwards; it follows, that from the resistance of the
bottom there will also be an endeavour upwards. And seeing again, that
by this endeavour of the water upwards, the body E F is lifted up, it
follows, that if the endeavour of the body downwards be not equal to the
endeavour of the water upwards, either the whole body E F will, by
reason of that inequality of their endeavours or moments, be raised out
of the water, or else it will descend to the bottom. But it is supposed
to stand so, as neither to ascend nor descend. Wherefore there is an
equilibrium between the two endeavours; that is to say, the weight of
the body E F is equal to the weight of so much water as the space F will
receive; which was to be proved.

[Sidenote: If a body be lighter than water, then how big soever that
           body be, it may float upon any quantity of water, how little
           soever.]

8. From hence it follows, that any body, of how great magnitude soever,
provided it consist of matter less heavy than water, may nevertheless
float upon any quantity of water, how little soever.

Let A B C D (in fig. 4) be a vessel; and in it let E F G H be a body
consisting of matter which is less heavy than water; and let the space A
G C F be filled with water. I say, the body E F G H will not sink to the
bottom D C. For seeing the matter of the body E F G H is less heavy than
water, if the whole space without A B C D were fall of water, yet some
part of the body E F G H, as E F I K, would be above the water; and the
weight of so much water as would fill the space I G H K would be equal
to the weight of the whole body E F G H; and consequently G H would not
touch the bottom D C. As for the sides of the vessel, it is no matter
whether they be hard or fluid; for they serve only to terminate the
water; which may be done as well by water as by any other matter how
hard soever; and the water without the vessel is terminated somewhere,
so as that it can spread no farther. The part therefore E F I K will be
extant above the water A G C F which is contained in the vessel.
Wherefore the body E F G H will also float upon the water A G C F, how
little soever that water be; which was to be demonstrated.

[Sidenote: How water may be lifted up and forced out of a vessel by
           air.]

9. In the 4th article of chapter XXVI, there is brought for the proving
of vacuum the experiment of water enclosed in a vessel; which water, the
orifice above being opened, is ejected upwards by the impulsion of the
air. It is therefore demanded, seeing water is heavier than air, how
that can be done. Let the second figure of the same, chapter XXVI be
considered, where the water is with great force injected by a syringe
into the space F G B. In that injection, the air (but pure air) goeth
with the same force out of the vessel through the injected water. But as
for those small bodies, which formerly I supposed to be intermingled
with air and to be moved with simple motion, they cannot, together with
the pure air, penetrate the water; but remaining behind are necessarily
thrust together into a narrower place, namely into the space which is
above the water F G. The motions therefore of those small bodies will be
less and less free, by how much the quantity of the injected water is
greater and greater; so that by their motions falling upon one another,
the same small bodies will mutually compress each other, and have a
perpetual endeavour of regaining their liberty, and of depressing the
water that hinders them. Wherefore, as soon as the orifice above is
opened, the water which is next it will have an endeavour to ascend, and
will therefore necessarily go out. But it cannot go out, unless at the
same time there enter in as much air; and therefore both the water will
go out, and the air enter in, till those small bodies which were left
within the vessel have recovered their former liberty of motion; that is
to say, till the vessel be again filled with air, and no water be left
of sufficient height to stop the passage at B. Wherefore I have shown a
possible cause of this phenomenon, namely, the same with that of
thunder. For as in the generation of thunder, the small bodies enclosed
within the clouds, by being too closely pent together, do by their
motion break the clouds, and restore themselves to their natural
liberty; so here also the small bodies enclosed within the space which
is above the strait line F G, do by their own motion expel the water as
soon as the passage is opened above. And if the passage be kept stopped,
and these small bodies be more vehemently compressed by the perpetual
forcing in of more water, they will at last break the vessel itself with
great noise.

[Sidenote: Why a bladder is heavier when blown full of air, than when it
           is empty.]

10. If air be blown into a hollow cylinder, or into a bladder, it will
increase the weight of either of them a little, as many have found by
experience, who with great accurateness have tried the same. And it is
no wonder, seeing, as I have supposed, there are intermingled with the
common air a great number of small hard bodies, which are heavier than
the pure air. For, the ethereal substance, being on all sides equally
agitated by the motion of the sun, hath an equal endeavour towards all
the parts of the universe; and, therefore, it hath no gravity at all.

[Sidenote: The cause of the ejection upwards of heavy bodies from a
           wind-gun.]

11. We find also by experience, that, by the force of air enclosed in a
hollow cannon, a bullet of lead may with considerable violence be shot
out of a gun of late invention, called the wind-gun. In the end of this
cannon there are two holes, with their valves on the inside, to shut
them close; one of them serving for the admission of air, and the other
for the letting of it out. Also, to that end which serves for the
receiving in of air, there is joined another cannon of the same metal
and bigness, in which there is fitted a rammer which is perforated, and
hath also a valve opening towards the former cannon. By the help of this
valve the rammer is easily drawn back, and letteth in air from without;
and being often drawn back and returned again with violent strokes, it
forceth some part of that air into the former cannon, so long, till at
last the resistance of the enclosed air is greater than the force of the
stroke. And by this means men think there is now a greater quantity of
air in the cannon than there was formerly, though it were full before.
Also, the air thus forced in, how much soever it be, is hindered from
getting out again by the aforesaid valves, which the very endeavour of
the air to get out doth necessarily shut. Lastly, that valve being
opened which was made for the letting out of the air, it presently
breaketh out with violence, and driveth the bullet before it with great
force and velocity.

As for the cause of this, I could easily attribute it, as most men do,
to condensation, and think that the air, which had at the first but its
ordinary degree of rarity, was afterwards, by the forcing in of more
air, condensed, and last of all, rarified again by being let out and
restored to its natural liberty. But I cannot imagine how the same place
can be always full, and, nevertheless, contain some times a greater,
sometimes a less quantity of matter; that is to say, that it can be
fuller than full. Nor can I conceive how fulness can of itself be an
efficient cause of motion. For both these are impossible. Wherefore we
must seek out some other possible cause of this phenomenon. Whilst,
therefore, the valve which serves for the letting in of air, is opened
by the first stroke of the rammer, the air within doth with equal force
resist the entering of the air from without; so that the endeavours
between the internal and external air are opposite, that is, there are
two opposite motions whilst the one goeth in and the other cometh out;
but no augmentation at all of air within the cannon. For there is driven
out by the stroke as much pure air, which passeth between the rammer and
the sides of the cannon, as there is forced in of air impure by the same
stroke. And thus, by many forcible strokes, the quantity of small hard
bodies will be increased within the cannon, and their motions also will
grow stronger and stronger, as long as the matter of the cannon is able
to endure their force; by which, if it be not broken, it will at least
be urged every way by their endeavour to free themselves; and as soon as
the valve, which serves to let them out, is opened, they will fly out
with violent motion, and carry with them the bullet which is in their
way. Wherefore, I have given a possible cause of this phenomenon.

[Sidenote: The cause of the ascent of water in a weather-glass.]

12. Water, contrary to the custom of heavy bodies, ascendeth in the
weather-glass; but it doth it when the air is cold: for when it is warm
it descendeth again. And this organ is called a thermometer or
thermoscope, because the degrees of heat and cold are measured and
marked by it. It is made in this manner. Let A B C D (in fig. 5) be a
vessel full of water, and E F G a hollow cylinder of glass, closed at E
and open at G. Let it be heated, and set upright within the water to F;
and let the open end reach to G. This being done, as the air by little
and little grows colder, the water will ascend slowly within the
cylinder from F towards E; till at last the external and internal air
coming to be both of the same temper, it will neither ascend higher nor
descend lower, till the temper of the air be changed. Suppose it,
therefore, to be settled anywhere, as at H. If now the heat of the air
be augmented, the water will descend below H; and if the heat be
diminished, it will ascend above it. Which, though it be certainly known
to be true by experience, the cause, nevertheless, hath not as yet been
discovered.

In the sixth and seventh articles of chapter XXVIII, where I consider
the cause of cold, I have shown, that fluid bodies are made colder by
the pressure of the air, that is to say, by a constant wind that
presseth them. For the same cause it is, that the superficies of the
water is pressed at F; and having no place, to which it may retire from
this pressure, besides the cavity of the cylinder between H and E, it is
therefore necessarily forced thither by the cold, and consequently it
ascendeth more or less, according as the cold is more or less increased.
And again, as the heat is more intense or the cold more remiss, the same
water will be depressed more or less by its own gravity, that is to say,
by the cause of gravity above explicated.

[Sidenote: Cause of motion upwards in living creatures]

13. Also living creatures, though they be heavy, can by leaping,
swimming and flying, raise themselves to a certain degree of height. But
they cannot do this except they be supported by some resisting body, as
the earth, the water and the air. For these motions have their beginning
from the contraction, by the help of the muscles, of the body animate.
For to this contraction there succeedeth a distension of their whole
bodies; by which distension, the earth, the water, or the air, which
supporteth them, is pressed; and from hence, by the reaction of those
pressed bodies, living creatures acquire an endeavour upwards, but such
as by reason of the gravity of their bodies is presently lost again. By
this endeavour, therefore, it is, that living creatures raise themselves
up a little way by leaping, but to no great purpose: but by swimming and
flying they raise themselves to a greater height; because, before the
effect of their endeavour is quite extinguished by the gravity of their
bodies, they can renew the same endeavour again.

That by the power of the soul, without any antecedent contraction of the
muscles or the help of something to support him, any man can be able to
raise his body upwards, is a childish conceit. For if it were true, a
man might raise himself to what height he pleased.

[Sidenote: That there is in nature a kind of body heavier than air,
           which nevertheless is not by sense distinguishable from it.]

14. The diaphanous medium, which surrounds the eye on all sides, is
invisible; nor is air to be seen in air, nor water in water, nor
anything but that which is more opacous. But in the confines of two
diaphanous bodies, one of them may be distinguished from the other. It
is not therefore a thing so very ridiculous for ordinary people to think
all that space empty, in which we say is air; it being the work of
reason to make us conceive that the air is anything. For by which of our
senses is it, that we take notice of the air, seeing we neither see, nor
hear, nor taste, nor smell, nor feel it to be anything? When we feel
heat, we do not impute it to the air, but to the fire: nor do we say the
air is cold, but we ourselves are cold; and when we feel the wind, we
rather think something is coming, than that any thing is already come.
Also, we do not at all feel the weight of water in water, much less of
air in air. That we come to know that to be a body, which we call air,
it is by reasoning; but it is from one reason only, namely, because it
is impossible for remote bodies to work upon our organs of sense but by
the help of bodies intermediate, without which we could have no sense of
them, till they come to be contiguous. Wherefore, from the senses alone,
without reasoning from effects, we cannot have sufficient evidence of
the nature of bodies.

For there is underground, in some mines of coals, a certain matter of a
middle nature between water and air, which nevertheless cannot by sense
be distinguished from air; for it is as diaphanous as the purest air;
and, as far as sense can judge, equally penetrable. But if we look upon
the effect, it is like that of water. For when that matter breaks out of
the earth into one of those pits, it fills the same either totally or to
some degree; and if a man or fire be then let down in it, it
extinguishes them in almost as little time as water would do. But for
the better understanding of this phenomenon, I shall describe the 6th
figure. In which let A B represent the pit of the mine; and let part
thereof, namely C B, be supposed to be filled with that matter. If now a
lighted candle be let down into it below C, it will as suddenly be
extinguished as if it were thrust into water. Also, if a grate filled
with coals thoroughly kindled and burning never so brightly, be let
down, as soon as ever it is below C, the fire will begin to grow pale,
and shortly after, losing its light, be extinguished, no otherwise than
if it were quenched in water. But if the grate be drawn up again
presently, whilst the coals are still very hot, the fire will, by little
and little, be kindled again, and shine as before. There is, indeed,
between this matter and water this considerable difference, that it
neither wetteth, nor sticketh to such things as are put down into it, as
water doth; which, by the moisture it leaveth, hindereth the kindling
again of the matter once extinguished. In like manner, if a man be let
down below C, he will presently fall into a great difficulty of
breathing, and immediately after into a swoon, and die unless he be
suddenly drawn up again. They, therefore, that go down into these pits,
have this custom, that as soon as ever they feel themselves sick, they
shake the rope by which they were let down, to signify they are not
well, and to the end that they may speedily be pulled up again. For if a
man be drawn out too late, void of sense and motion, they dig up a turf,
and put his face and mouth into the fresh earth; by which means, unless
he be quite dead, he comes to himself again, by little and little, and
recovers life by breathing out, as it were, of that suffocating matter,
which he had sucked in whilst he was in the pit; almost in the same
manner as they that are drowned come to themselves again by vomiting up
the water. But this doth not happen in all mines, but in some only; and
in those not always, but often. In such pits as are subject to it, they
use this remedy. They dig another pit, as D E, close by it, of equal
depth, and joining them both together with one common channel, E B, they
make a fire in the bottom E, which carries out at D the air contained in
the pit D E; and this draws with it the air contained in the channel E
B; which, in like manner, is followed by the noxious matter contained in
C B; and, by this means, the pit is for that time made healthful. Out of
this history, which I write only to such as have had experience of the
truth of it, without any design to support my philosophy with stories of
doubtful credit, may be collected the following possible cause of this
phenomenon; namely, that there is a certain matter fluid and most
transparent, and not much lighter than water, which, breaking out of the
earth, fills the pit to C; and that in this matter, as in water, both
fire and living creatures are extinguished.

[Sidenote: Of the cause of magnetical virtue.]

15. About the nature of heavy bodies, the greatest difficulty ariseth
from the contemplation of those things which make other heavy bodies
ascend to them; such as jet, amber, and the loadstone. But that which
troubles men most is the loadstone, which is also called _Lapis
Herculeus_; a stone, though otherwise despicable, yet of so great power
that it taketh up iron from the earth, and holds it suspended in the
air, as Hercules did Antæus. Nevertheless, we wonder at it somewhat the
less, because we see jet draw up straws, which are heavy bodies, though
not so heavy as iron. But as for jet, it must first be excited by
rubbing, that is to say, by motion to and fro; whereas the loadstone
hath sufficient excitation from its own nature, that is to say, from
some internal principle of motion peculiar to itself. Now, whatsoever is
moved, is moved by some contiguous and moved body, as hath been formerly
demonstrated. And from hence it follows evidently, that the first
endeavour, which iron hath towards the loadstone, is caused by the
motion of that air which is contiguous to the iron: also, that this
motion is generated by the motion of the next air, and so on
successively, till by this succession we find that the motion of all the
intermediate air taketh its beginning from some motion which is in the
loadstone itself; which motion, because the loadstone seems to be at
rest, is invisible. It is therefore certain, that the attractive power
of the loadstone is nothing else but some motion of the smallest
particles thereof. Supposing, therefore, that those small bodies, of
which the loadstone is in the bowels of the earth composed, have by
nature such motion or endeavour as was above attributed to jet, namely,
a reciprocal motion in a line too short to be seen, both those stones
will have one and the same cause of attraction. Now in what manner and
in what order of working this cause produceth the effect of attraction,
is the thing to be enquired. And first we know, that when the string of
a lute or viol is stricken, the vibration, that is, the reciprocal
motion of that string in the same strait line, causeth like vibration in
another string which hath like tension. We know also, that the dregs or
small sands, which sink to the bottom of a vessel, will be raised up
from the bottom by any strong and reciprocal agitation of the water,
stirred with the hand or with a staff. Why, therefore, should not
reciprocal motion of the parts of the loadstone contribute as much
towards the moving of iron? For, if in the loadstone there be supposed
such reciprocal motion, or motion of the parts forwards and backwards,
it will follow that the like motion will be propagated by the air to the
iron, and consequently that there will be in all the parts of the iron
the same reciprocations or motions forwards and backwards. And from
hence also it will follow, that the intermediate air between the stone
and the iron will, by little and little, be thrust away; and the air
being thrust away, the bodies of the loadstone and the iron will
necessarily come together. The possible cause therefore why the
loadstone and jet draw to them, the one iron, the other straws, may be
this, that those attracting bodies have reciprocal motion either in a
strait line, or in an elliptical line, when there is nothing in the
nature of the attracted bodies which is repugnant to such a motion.

But why the loadstone, if with the help of cork it float at liberty upon
the top of the water, should from any position whatsoever so place
itself in the plane of the meridian, as that the same points, which at
one time of its being at rest respect the poles of the earth, should at
all other times respect the same poles, the cause may be this; that the
reciprocal motion, which I supposed to be in the parts of the stone, is
made in a line parallel to the axis of the earth, and has been in those
parts ever since the stone was generated. Seeing therefore, the stone,
whilst it remains in the mine, and is carried about together with the
earth by its diurnal motion, doth by length of time get a habit of being
moved in a line which is perpendicular to the line of its reciprocal
motion, it will afterwards, though its axis be removed from the parallel
situation it had with the axis of the earth, retain its endeavour of
returning to that situation again; and all endeavour being the beginning
of motion, and nothing intervening that may hinder the same, the
loadstone will therefore return to its former situation. For, any piece
of iron that has for a long time rested in the plane of the meridian,
whensoever it is forced from that situation and afterwards left to its
own liberty again, will of itself return to lie in the meridian again;
which return is caused by the endeavour it acquired from the diurnal
motion of the earth in the parallel circles which are perpendicular to
the meridians.

If iron be rubbed by the loadstone drawn from one pole to the other, two
things will happen; one, that the iron will acquire the same direction
with the loadstone, that is to say, that it will lie in the meridian,
and have its axis and poles in the same position with those of the
stone; the other, that the like poles of the stone and of the iron will
avoid one another, and the unlike poles approach one another. And the
cause of the former may be this, that iron being touched by motion which
is not reciprocal, but drawn the same way from pole to pole, there will
be imprinted in the iron also an endeavour from the same pole to the
same pole. For seeing the loadstone differs from iron no otherwise than
as ore from metal, there will be no repugnance at all in the iron to
receive the same motion which is in the stone. From whence it follows,
that seeing they are both affected alike by the diurnal motion of the
earth, they will both equally return to their situation in the meridian,
whensoever they are put from the same. Also, of the latter this may be
the cause, that as the loadstone in touching the iron doth by its action
imprint in the iron an endeavour towards one of the poles, suppose
towards the North Pole; so reciprocally, the iron by its action upon the
loadstone doth imprint in it an endeavour towards the other pole, namely
towards the South Pole. It happens therefore in these reciprocations or
motions forwards and backwards of the particles of the stone and of the
iron betwixt the north and the south, that whilst in one of them the
motion is from north to south, and the return from south to north, in
the other the motion will be from south to north, and the return from
north to south; which motions being opposite to one another, and
communicated to the air, the north pole of the iron, whilst the
attraction is working, will be depressed towards the south pole of the
loadstone; or contrarily, the north pole of the loadstone will be
depressed towards the south pole of the iron; and the axis both of the
loadstone and of the iron will be situate in the same strait line. The
truth whereof is taught us by experience.

As for the propagation of this magnetical virtue, not only through the
air, but through any other bodies how hard soever, it is not to be
wondered at, seeing no motion can be so weak, but that it may be
propagated infinitely through a space filled with body of any hardness
whatsoever. For in a full medium, there can be no motion which doth not
make the next part yield, and that the next, and so successively without
end; so that there is no effect whatsoever, but to the production
thereof something is necessarily contributed by the several motions of
all the several things that are in the world.

[Sidenote: Conclusion.]

And thus much concerning the nature of body in general; with which I
conclude this my first section of the Elements of Philosophy. In the
first, second, and third parts, where the principles of ratiocination
consist in our own understanding, that is to say, in the legitimate use
of such words as we ourselves constitute, all the theorems, if I be not
deceived, are rightly demonstrated. The fourth part depends upon
hypotheses; which unless we know them to be true, it is impossible for
us to demonstrate that those causes, which I have there explicated, are
the true causes of the things whose productions I have derived from
them.

Nevertheless, seeing I have assumed no hypothesis, which is not both
possible and easy to be comprehended; and seeing also that I have
reasoned aright from those assumptions, I have withal sufficiently
demonstrated that they may be the true causes; which is the end of
physical contemplation. If any other man from other hypotheses shall
demonstrate the same or greater things, there will be greater praise and
thanks due to him than I demand for myself, provided his hypotheses be
such as are conceivable. For as for those that say anything may be moved
or produced by _itself_, by _species_, by _its own power_, by
_substantial forms_, by _incorporeal substances_, by _instinct_, by
_antiperistasis_, by _antipathy_, _sympathy_, _occult quality_, and
other empty words of schoolmen, their saying so is to no purpose.

And now I proceed to the phenomena of man's body; where I shall speak of
the _optics_, and of the _dispositions_, _affections_, and _manners_ of
men, if it shall please God to give me life, and show their causes.

[Illustration:

  _Vol. 1. Lat. & Eng._
  C. XXVIII & XXX.
  _Fig. 1-6_
]

                             END OF VOL. I.








                                LONDON:
             C. RICHARDS, ST. MARTIN'S LANE, CHARING CROSS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

Figures 18.2 and 27.2 are not mentioned by name in the text. Figure
14.10 is mentioned only in Chapter XIII.

However, Figure 2 of Chapter XVIII would appear to be the subject of a
discussion on p. 270. A sidenote has been added, and includes a
reference to the figure.

Likewise Figure 2 of Chapter XXVII, depicting a ‘prisma’, is discussed
in detail on p. 459 _et seq._. Again, a sidenote has been interpolated
at the opening of that description, and includes a reference to the
figure.

The diacritics used in the Greek phrases is followed as printed, though
they sometimes seem non-standard (i.e., εἰναι rather than ειναὶ).

In each chapter's summary, the article numbers are prefixed with a dash
if they appeared midline. Dashes have been added to the text in the case
where the article number happened to appear in the first column.

On rare occasions, there are errors in the numbering of the articles in
the chapter summary. For example, in Chapter XVII, article 7 was
misnumbered as a second ‘6’.

In article 18 of Chapter XIII, a reference to article 10 of that chapter
used the Roman ‘X’ which is the only instance of that usage. It is now
referred to as article 10.

Other errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been corrected,
and are noted here. The references are to the page and line in the
original.

  52.17    _every man [i]s a living creature_             Restored.

  73.14    in the first place, we [we] are to search      Removed.

  255.11   seeing the [pro]proportion                     Removed.

  267.22   And therefore if it[ it] be again as R to T    Removed.

  307.24   the spiral of Arch[i/e]mides                   Replaced.

  329.29   with simple motion the[ the] perimeter         Removed.

  339.11   be cut in E and[ and] G by a strait line       Removed.

  372.12   to the base F H that[ that] can possibly be    Removed.
           drawn

  464.23   the sea appears b[l]ack when ruffled           Inserted.

  439.2    will make fifty-nine revo[lu]tions             Inserted.

                              Chapter XIV

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]

[Illustration: Fig. 9.]

[Illustration: Fig. 10.]

                              CHAPTER XVI

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]

[Illustration: Fig. 9.]

[Illustration: Fig. 10.]

[Illustration: Fig. 11.]

                              Chapter XVII

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]

                             Chapter XVIII

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

                              Chapter XIX

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]

[Illustration: Fig. 9.]

[Illustration: Fig. 10.]

                               Chapter XX

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

                              Chapter XXI

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

                              Chapter XXII

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

                             Chapter XXIII

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6]

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

[Illustration: Fig. 8]

[Illustration: Fig 9.]

                             CHAPTER XXIV.

[Illustration: Fig 1.]

[Illustration: Fig 2.]

[Illustration: Fig 3.]

[Illustration: Fig 4.]

[Illustration: Fig 5.]

[Illustration: Fig 6.]

                             CHAPTER XXVI.

[Illustration: Fig 1.]

[Illustration: Fig 2.]

[Illustration: Fig 3.]

[Illustration: Fig 4.]

[Illustration: Fig 5.]

                             Chapter XXVII.

[Illustration: Fig 1.]

[Illustration: Fig 2.]

                              Chapter XXX.

[Illustration: Fig 1.]

[Illustration: Fig 2.]

[Illustration: Fig 3.]

[Illustration: Fig 4.]

[Illustration: Fig 5.]

[Illustration: Fig 6.]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENGLISH WORKS OF THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY, VOLUME 01 (OF 11) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of The English works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury, Volume 03 (of 11)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The English works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury, Volume 03 (of 11)

Author: Thomas Hobbes

Editor: Sir William Molesworth

Release date: July 1, 2024 [eBook #73957]

Language: English

Original publication: London: John Bohn, 1839

Credits: Emmanuel Ackerman, KD Weeks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENGLISH WORKS OF THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY, VOLUME 03 (OF 11) ***


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_.

Footnotes have been moved to follow the paragraphs in which they are
referenced.

Marginal sidenotes which span multiple pages were often repeated on each
page. These have been removed.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

                               LEVIATHAN,

                                   OR

                      THE MATTER, FORM, AND POWER

                                  OF A

                              COMMONWEALTH

                       ECCLESIASTICAL AND CIVIL.

[Illustration: _Non est potestas Super Terram quæ Comparetur ei._]




                                  THE
                             ENGLISH WORKS
                                   OF
                             THOMAS HOBBES

                             OF MALMESBURY;

                     NOW FIRST COLLECTED AND EDITED

                                   BY

                     SIR WILLIAM MOLESWORTH, BART.

                                  ---

                                VOL III.

                                  ---


                                LONDON:
                               JOHN BOHN,
                    HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

                                  ---

                              MDCCCXXXIX.




                                LONDON:
                C. RICHARDS, PRINTER, ST. MARTIN’S LANE.




                       TO MY MOST HONOR’D FRIEND

                         MR. FRANCIS GODOLPHIN,

                             OF GODOLPHIN.

                                -------

HONOR’D SIR,

Your most worthy brother, Mr. SIDNEY GODOLPHIN, when he lived, was
pleased to think my studies something, and otherwise to oblige me, as
you know, with real testimonies of his good opinion, great in
themselves, and the greater for the worthiness of his person. For there
is not any virtue that disposeth a man, either to the service of God, or
to the service of his country, to civil society, or private friendship,
that did not manifestly appear in his conversation, not as acquired by
necessity, or affected upon occasion, but inherent, and shining in a
generous constitution of his nature. Therefore, in honour and gratitude
to him, and with devotion to yourself, I humbly dedicate unto you this
my discourse of Commonwealth. I know not how the world will receive it,
nor how it may reflect on those that shall seem to favour it. For in a
way beset with those that contend, on one side for too great liberty,
and on the other side for too much authority, ’tis hard to pass between
the points of both unwounded. But yet, methinks, the endeavour to
advance the civil power, should not be by the civil power condemned; nor
private men, by reprehending it, declare they think that power too
great. Besides, I speak not of the men, but, in the abstract, of the
seat of power, (like to those simple and unpartial creatures in the
Roman Capitol, that with their noise defended those within it, not
because they were they, but there), offending none, I think, but those
without, or such within, if there be any such, as favour them. That
which perhaps may most offend, are certain texts of Holy Scripture,
alleged by me to other purpose than ordinarily they use to be by others.
But I have done it with due submission, and also, in order to my
subject, necessarily; for they are the outworks of the enemy, from
whence they impugn the civil power. If notwithstanding this, you find my
labour generally decried, you may be pleased to excuse yourself, and
say, I am a man that love my own opinions, and think all true I say,
that I honoured your brother, and honour you, and have presumed on that,
to assume the title, without your knowledge, of being, as I am,

    SIR,
  Your most humble,
       and most obedient Servant,
                     THOMAS HOBBES.

_Paris, April 15/25, 1651._




                     THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.

                                -------

                        THE FIRST PART.--OF MAN.

     CHAP.                                                    PAGE.

           Introduction                                          ix

        1. Of Sense                                               1

        2. Of Imagination                                         3

        3. Of the Consequence or Train of Imaginations           11

        4. Of Speech                                             18

        5. Of Reason and Science                                 29

        6. Of the Interior Beginnings of Voluntary Motions,
             commonly called the Passions; and the Speeches
             by which they are expressed                         38

        7. Of the Ends or Resolutions of Discourse               51

        8. Of the Virtues, commonly called Intellectual; and
             their contrary Defects                              56

        9. Of the Several Subjects of Knowledge                  71

       10. Of Power, Worth, Dignity, Honour, and Worthiness      74

       11. Of the Difference of Manners                          85

       12. Of Religion                                           94

       13. Of the Natural Condition of Mankind as concerning
             their Felicity and Misery                          110

       14. Of the First and Second Natural Laws, and of
             Contract                                           116

       15. Of other Laws of Nature                              130

       16. Of Persons, Authors, and Things Personated           147


                   THE SECOND PART.--OF COMMONWEALTH.


       17. Of the Causes, Generation, and Definition of a
             Commonwealth                                       153

       18. Of the Rights of Sovereigns by Institution           159

       19. Of the several kinds of Commonwealth by
             Institution; and of Succession to the Sovereign
             Power                                              171

       20. Of Dominion Paternal, and Despotical                 185

       21. Of the Liberty of Subjects                           196

       22. Of Systems Subject, Political, and Private           210

       23. Of the Public Ministers of Sovereign Power           226

       24. Of the Nutrition, and Procreation of a
             Commonwealth                                       232

       25. Of Counsel                                           240

       26. Of Civil Laws                                        250

       27. Of Crimes, Excuses, and Extenuations                 277

       28. Of Punishments, and Rewards                          297

       29. Of those things that weaken, or tend to the
             Dissolution of a Commonwealth                      308

       30. Of the Office of the Sovereign Representative        322

       31. Of the Kingdom of God by Nature                      343


             THE THIRD PART.--OF A CHRISTIAN COMMONWEALTH.


       32. Of the Principles of Christian Politics              359

       33. Of the Number, Antiquity, Scope, Authority, and
             Interpreters of the Books of Holy Scripture        366

       34. Of the Signification of Spirit, Angel, and
             Inspiration, in the Books of Holy Scripture        380

       35. Of the Signification in Scripture of the Kingdom
             of God, of Holy, Sacred, and Sacrament             396

       36. Of the Word of God, and of Prophets                  407

       37. Of Miracles, and their Use                           427

       38. Of the Signification in Scripture of Eternal Life,
             Hell, Salvation, the World to Come, and
             Redemption                                         437

       39. Of the Signification in Scripture of the word
             Church                                             458

       40. Of the Rights of the Kingdom of God, in Abraham,
             Moses, the High-Priests, and the Kings of Judah    461

       41. Of the Office of Our Blessed Saviour                 475

       42. Of Power Ecclesiastical                              485

       43. Of what is Necessary for a Man’s Reception into
             the Kingdom of Heaven                              584


             THE FOURTH PART.--OF THE KINGDOM OF DARKNESS.


       44. Of Spiritual Darkness, from Misinterpretation of
             Scripture                                          603

       45. Of Demonology, and other Relics of the Religion of
             the Gentiles                                       637

       46. Of Darkness from Vain Philosophy, and Fabulous
             Traditions                                         664

       47. Of the Benefit proceeding from such Darkness; and
             to whom it accrueth                                688

           A Review and Conclusion                              701




                                  THE
                             INTRODUCTION.

                                -------


Nature, the art whereby God hath made and governs the world, is by the
_art_ of man, as in many other things, so in this also imitated, that it
can make an artificial animal. For seeing life is but a motion of limbs,
the beginning whereof is in some principal part within; why may we not
say, that all _automata_ (engines that move themselves by springs and
wheels as doth a watch) have an artificial life? For what is the
_heart_, but a _spring_; and the _nerves_, but so many _strings_; and
the _joints_, but so many _wheels_, giving motion to the whole body,
such as was intended by the artificer? _Art_ goes yet further, imitating
that rational and most excellent work of nature, _man_. For by art is
created that great LEVIATHAN called a COMMONWEALTH, or STATE, in Latin
CIVITAS, which is but an artificial man; though of greater stature and
strength than the natural, for whose protection and defence it was
intended; and in which the _sovereignty_ is an artificial _soul_, as
giving life and motion to the whole body; the _magistrates_, and other
_officers_ of judicature and execution, artificial _joints_; _reward_
and _punishment_, by which fastened to the seat of the sovereignty every
joint and member is moved to perform his duty, are the _nerves_, that do
the same in the body natural; the _wealth_ and _riches_ of all the
particular members, are the _strength_; _salus populi_, the _people’s
safety_, its _business_; _counsellors_, by whom all things needful for
it to know are suggested unto it, are the _memory_; _equity_, and
_laws_, an artificial _reason_ and _will_; _concord_, _health_;
_sedition_, _sickness_; and _civil war_, _death_. Lastly, the _pacts_
and _covenants_, by which the parts of this body politic were at first
made, set together, and united, resemble that _fiat_, or the _let us
make man_, pronounced by God in the creation.

To describe the nature of this artificial man, I will consider

First, the _matter_ thereof, and the _artificer_; both which is _man_.

Secondly, _how_, and by what _covenants_ it is made; what are the
_rights_ and just _power_ or _authority_ of a _sovereign_; and what it
is that _preserveth_ or _dissolveth_ it.

Thirdly, what is a _Christian commonwealth_.

Lastly, what is the _kingdom of darkness_.

Concerning the first, there is a saying much usurped of late, that
_wisdom_ is acquired, not by reading of _books_, but of _men_.
Consequently whereunto, those persons, that for the most part can give
no other proof of being wise, take great delight to show what they think
they have read in men, by uncharitable censures of one another behind
their backs. But there is another saying not of late understood, by
which they might learn truly to read one another, if they would take the
pains; that is, _nosce teipsum_, _read thyself_: which was not meant, as
it is now used, to countenance, either the barbarous state of men in
power, towards their inferiors; or to encourage men of low degree, to a
saucy behaviour towards their betters; but to teach us, that for the
similitude of the thoughts and passions of one man, to the thoughts and
passions of another, whosoever looketh into himself, and considereth
what he doth, when he does _think_, _opine_, _reason_, _hope_, _fear_,
&c. and upon what grounds; he shall thereby read and know, what are the
thoughts and passions of all other men upon the like occasions. I say
the similitude of _passions_, which are the same in all men, _desire_,
_fear_, _hope_, &c.; not the similitude of the _objects_ of the
passions, which are the things _desired_, _feared_, _hoped_, &c.: for
these the constitution individual, and particular education, do so vary,
and they are so easy to be kept from our knowledge, that the characters
of man’s heart, blotted and confounded as they are with dissembling,
lying, counterfeiting, and erroneous doctrines, are legible only to him
that searcheth hearts. And though by men’s actions we do discover their
design sometimes; yet to do it without comparing them with our own, and
distinguishing all circumstances, by which the case may come to be
altered, is to decypher without a key, and be for the most part
deceived, by too much trust, or by too much diffidence; as he that
reads, is himself a good or evil man.

But let one man read another by his actions never so perfectly, it
serves him only with his acquaintance, which are but few. He that is to
govern a whole nation, must read in himself, not this or that particular
man; but mankind: which though it be hard to do, harder than to learn
any language or science; yet when I shall have set down my own reading
orderly, and perspicuously, the pains left another, will be only to
consider, if he also find not the same in himself. For this kind of
doctrine admitteth no other demonstration.




                                PART I.

                                OF MAN.

                                -------


                               CHAPTER I.

                               OF SENSE.


[Sidenote: Sense.]

Concerning the thoughts of man, I will consider them first singly, and
afterwards in train, or dependence upon one another. Singly, they are
every one a _representation_ or _appearance_, of some quality, or other
accident of a body without us, which is commonly called an _object_.
Which object worketh on the eyes, ears, and other parts of a man’s body;
and by diversity of working, produceth diversity of appearances.

The original of them all, is that which we call SENSE, for there is no
conception in a man’s mind, which hath not at first, totally, or by
parts, been begotten upon the organs of sense. The rest are derived from
that original.

To know the natural cause of sense, is not very necessary to the
business now in hand; and I have elsewhere written of the same at large.
Nevertheless, to fill each part of my present method, I will briefly
deliver the same in this place.

The cause of sense, is the external body, or object, which presseth the
organ proper to each sense, either immediately, as in the taste and
touch; or mediately, as in seeing, hearing, and smelling; which
pressure, by the mediation of the nerves, and other strings and
membranes of the body, continued inwards to the brain and heart, causeth
there a resistance, or counter-pressure, or endeavour of the heart to
deliver itself, which endeavour, because _outward_, seemeth to be some
matter without. And this _seeming_, or _fancy_, is that which men call
_sense_; and consisteth, as to the eye, in a _light_, or _colour
figured_; to the ear, in a _sound_; to the nostril, in an _odour_; to
the tongue and palate, in a _savour_; and to the rest of the body, in
_heat_, _cold_, _hardness_, _softness_, and such other qualities as we
discern by _feeling_. All which qualities, called _sensible_, are in the
object, that causeth them, but so many several motions of the matter, by
which it presseth our organs diversely. Neither in us that are pressed,
are they any thing else, but divers motions; for motion produceth
nothing but motion. But their appearance to us is fancy, the same
waking, that dreaming. And as pressing, rubbing, or striking the eye,
makes us fancy a light; and pressing the ear, produceth a din; so do the
bodies also we see, or hear, produce the same by their strong, though
unobserved action. For if those colours and sounds were in the bodies,
or objects that cause them, they could not be severed from them, as by
glasses, and in echoes by reflection, we see they are; where we know the
thing we see is in one place, the appearance in another. And though at
some certain distance, the real and very object seem invested with the
fancy it begets in us; yet still the object is one thing, the image or
fancy is another. So that sense, in all cases, is nothing else but
original fancy, caused, as I have said, by the pressure, that is, by the
motion, of external things upon our eyes, ears, and other organs
thereunto ordained.

But the philosophy-schools, through all the universities of Christendom,
grounded upon certain texts of Aristotle, teach another doctrine, and
say, for the cause of _vision_, that the thing seen, sendeth forth on
every side a _visible species_, in English, a _visible show_,
_apparition_, or _aspect_, or _a being seen_; the receiving whereof into
the eye, is _seeing_. And for the cause of _hearing_, that the thing
heard, sendeth forth an _audible species_, that is an _audible aspect_,
or _audible being seen_; which entering at the ear, maketh _hearing_.
Nay, for the cause of _understanding_ also, they say the thing
understood, sendeth forth an _intelligible species_, that is, an
_intelligible being seen_; which, coming into the understanding, makes
us understand. I say not this, as disproving the use of universities;
but because I am to speak hereafter of their office in a commonwealth, I
must let you see on all occasions by the way, what things would be
amended in them; amongst which the frequency of insignificant speech is
one.

                                -------


                              CHAPTER II.

                            OF IMAGINATION.


[Sidenote: Imagination.]

That when a thing lies still, unless somewhat else stir it, it will lie
still for ever, is a truth that no man doubts of. But that when a thing
is in motion, it will eternally be in motion, unless somewhat else stay
it, though the reason be the same, namely, that nothing can change
itself, is not so easily assented to. For men measure, not only other
men, but all other things, by themselves; and because they find
themselves subject after motion to pain, and lassitude, think every
thing else grows weary of motion, and seeks repose of its own accord;
little considering, whether it be not some other motion, wherein that
desire of rest they find in themselves, consisteth. From hence it is,
that the schools say, heavy bodies fall downwards, out of an appetite to
rest, and to conserve their nature in that place which is most proper
for them; ascribing appetite, and knowledge of what is good for their
conservation, which is more than man has, to things inanimate, absurdly.

When a body is once in motion, it moveth, unless something else hinder
it, eternally; and whatsoever hindreth it, cannot in an instant, but in
time, and by degrees, quite extinguish it; and as we see in the water,
though the wind cease, the waves give not over rolling for a long time
after: so also it happeneth in that motion, which is made in the
internal parts of a man, then, when he sees, dreams, &c. For after the
object is removed, or the eye shut, we still retain an image of the
thing seen, though more obscure than when we see it. And this is it, the
Latins call _imagination_, from the image made in seeing; and apply the
same, though improperly, to all the other senses. But the Greeks call it
_fancy_; which signifies _appearance_, and is as proper to one sense, as
to another. IMAGINATION therefore is nothing but _decaying sense_; and
is found in men, and many other living creatures, as well sleeping, as
waking.

The decay of sense in men waking, is not the decay of the motion made in
sense; but an obscuring of it, in such manner as the light of the sun
obscureth the light of the stars; which stars do no less exercise their
virtue, by which they are visible, in the day than in the night. But
because amongst many strokes, which our eyes, ears, and other organs
receive from external bodies, the predominant only is sensible;
therefore, the light of the sun being predominant, we are not affected
with the action of the stars. And any object being removed from our
eyes, though the impression it made in us remain, yet other objects more
present succeeding, and working on us, the imagination of the past is
obscured, and made weak, as the voice of a man is in the noise of the
day. From whence it followeth, that the longer the time is, after the
sight or sense of any object, the weaker is the imagination. For the
continual change of man’s body destroys in time the parts which in sense
were moved: so that distance of time, and of place, hath one and the
same effect in us. For as at a great distance of place, that which we
look at appears dim, and without distinction of the smaller parts; and
as voices grow weak, and inarticulate; so also, after great distance of
time, our imagination of the past is weak; and we lose, for example, of
cities we have seen, many particular streets, and of actions, many
particular circumstances. This _decaying sense_, when we would express
the thing itself, I mean _fancy_ itself, we call _imagination_, as I
said before: but when we would express the decay, and signify that the
sense is fading, old, and past, it is called _memory_. So that
imagination and memory are but one thing, which for divers
considerations hath divers names.

[Sidenote: Memory.]

Much memory, or memory of many things, is called _experience_. Again,
imagination being only of those things which have been formerly
perceived by sense, either all at once, or by parts at several times;
the former, which is the imagining the whole object as it was presented
to the sense, is _simple_ imagination, as when one imagineth a man, or
horse, which he hath seen before. The other is _compounded_; as when,
from the sight of a man at one time, and of a horse at another, we
conceive in our mind a Centaur. So when a man compoundeth the image of
his own person with the image of the actions of another man, as when a
man imagines himself a Hercules or an Alexander, which happeneth often
to them that are much taken with reading of romances, it is a compound
imagination, and properly but a fiction of the mind. There be also other
imaginations that rise in men, though waking, from the great impression
made in sense: as from gazing upon the sun, the impression leaves an
image of the sun before our eyes a long time after; and from being long
and vehemently attent upon geometrical figures, a man shall in the dark,
though awake, have the images of lines and angles before his eyes; which
kind of fancy hath no particular name, as being a thing that doth not
commonly fall into men’s discourse.

[Sidenote: Dreams.]

The imaginations of them that sleep are those we call _dreams_. And
these also, as all other imaginations, have been before, either totally
or by parcels, in the sense. And because in sense, the brain and nerves,
which are the necessary organs of sense, are so benumbed in sleep, as
not easily to be moved by the action of external objects, there can
happen in sleep no imagination, and therefore no dream, but what
proceeds from the agitation of the inward parts of man’s body; which
inward parts, for the connexion they have with the brain, and other
organs, when they be distempered, do keep the same in motion; whereby
the imaginations there formerly made, appear as if a man were waking;
saving that the organs of sense being now benumbed, so as there is no
new object, which can master and obscure them with a more vigorous
impression, a dream must needs be more clear, in this silence of sense,
than our waking thoughts. And hence it cometh to pass, that it is a hard
matter, and by many thought impossible, to distinguish exactly between
sense and dreaming. For my part, when I consider that in dreams I do not
often nor constantly think of the same persons, places, objects, and
actions, that I do waking; nor remember so long a train of coherent
thoughts, dreaming, as at other times; and because waking I often
observe the absurdity of dreams, but never dream of the absurdities of
my waking thoughts; I am well satisfied, that being awake, I know I
dream not, though when I dream I think myself awake.

And seeing dreams are caused by the distemper of some of the inward
parts of the body, divers distempers must needs cause different dreams.
And hence it is that lying cold breedeth dreams of fear, and raiseth the
thought and image of some fearful object, the motion from the brain to
the inner parts and from the inner parts to the brain being reciprocal;
and that as anger causeth heat in some parts of the body when we are
awake, so when we sleep the overheating of the same parts causeth anger,
and raiseth up in the brain the imagination of an enemy. In the same
manner, as natural kindness, when we are awake, causeth desire, and
desire makes heat in certain other parts of the body; so also too much
heat in those parts, while we sleep, raiseth in the brain an imagination
of some kindness shown. In sum, our dreams are the reverse of our waking
imaginations; the motion when we are awake beginning at one end, and
when we dream at another.

[Sidenote: Apparitions or visions.]

The most difficult discerning of a man’s dream, from his waking
thoughts, is then, when by some accident we observe not that we have
slept: which is easy to happen to a man full of fearful thoughts, and
whose conscience is much troubled; and that sleepeth, without the
circumstances of going to bed or putting off his clothes, as one that
noddeth in a chair. For he that taketh pains, and industriously lays
himself to sleep, in case any uncouth and exorbitant fancy come unto
him, cannot easily think it other than a dream. We read of Marcus
Brutus, (one that had his life given him by Julius Cæsar, and was also
his favourite, and notwithstanding murdered him), how at Philippi, the
night before he gave battle to Augustus Cæsar, he saw a fearful
apparition, which is commonly related by historians as a vision; but
considering the circumstances, one may easily judge to have been but a
short dream. For sitting in his tent, pensive and troubled with the
horror of his rash act, it was not hard for him, slumbering in the cold,
to dream of that which most affrighted him; which fear, as by degrees it
made him wake, so also it must needs make the apparition by degrees to
vanish; and having no assurance that he slept, he could have no cause to
think it a dream, or any thing but a vision. And this is no very rare
accident; for even they that be perfectly awake, if they be timorous and
superstitious, possessed with fearful tales, and alone in the dark, are
subject to the like fancies, and believe they see spirits and dead men’s
ghosts walking in churchyards; whereas it is either their fancy only, or
else the knavery of such persons as make use of such superstitious fear,
to pass disguised in the night, to places they would not be known to
haunt.

From this ignorance of how to distinguish dreams, and other strong
fancies, from vision and sense, did arise the greatest part of the
religion of the Gentiles in time past, that worshipped satyrs, fawns,
nymphs, and the like; and now-a-days the opinion that rude people have
of fairies, ghosts, and goblins, and of the power of witches. For as for
witches, I think not that their witchcraft is any real power; but yet
that they are justly punished, for the false belief they have that they
can do such mischief, joined with their purpose to do it if they can;
their trade being nearer to a new religion than to a craft or science.
And for fairies, and walking ghosts, the opinion of them has, I think,
been on purpose either taught or not confuted, to keep in credit the use
of exorcism, of crosses, of holy water, and other such inventions of
ghostly men. Nevertheless, there is no doubt, but God can make unnatural
apparitions; but that he does it so often, as men need to fear such
things, more than they fear the stay or change of the course of nature,
which he also can stay, and change, is no point of Christian faith. But
evil men under pretext that God can do any thing, are so bold as to say
any thing when it serves their turn, though they think it untrue; it is
the part of a wise man, to believe them no farther, than right reason
makes that which they say, appear credible. If this superstitious fear
of spirits were taken away, and with it, prognostics from dreams, false
prophecies, and many other things depending thereon, by which crafty
ambitious persons abuse the simple people, men would be much more fitted
than they are for civil obedience.

And this ought to be the work of the schools: but they rather nourish
such doctrine. For, not knowing what imagination or the senses are, what
they receive, they teach: some saying, that imaginations rise of
themselves, and have no cause; others, that they rise most commonly from
the will; and that good thoughts are blown (inspired) into a man by God,
and evil thoughts by the Devil; or that good thoughts are poured
(infused) into a man by God, and evil ones by the Devil. Some say the
senses receive the species of things, and deliver them to the common
sense; and the common sense delivers them over to the fancy, and the
fancy to the memory, and the memory to the judgment, like handing of
things from one to another, with many words making nothing understood.

[Sidenote: Understanding.]

The imagination that is raised in man, or any other creature indued with
the faculty of imagining, by words, or other voluntary signs, is that we
generally call _understanding_; and is common to man and beast. For a
dog by custom will understand the call, or the rating of his master; and
so will many other beasts. That understanding which is peculiar to man,
is the understanding not only his will, but his conceptions and
thoughts, by the sequel and contexture of the names of things into
affirmations, negations, and other forms of speech; and of this kind of
understanding I shall speak hereafter.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER III.

              OF THE CONSEQUENCE OR TRAIN OF IMAGINATIONS.


By _Consequence_, or TRAIN of thoughts, I understand that succession of
one thought to another, which is called, to distinguish it from
discourse in words, _mental discourse_.

When a man thinketh on any thing whatsoever, his next thought after, is
not altogether so casual as it seems to be. Not every thought to every
thought succeeds indifferently. But as we have no imagination, whereof
we have not formerly had sense, in whole, or in parts; so we have no
transition from one imagination to another, whereof we never had the
like before in our senses. The reason whereof is this. All fancies are
motions within us, relics of those made in the sense: and those motions
that immediately succeeded one another in the sense, continue also
together after sense: insomuch as the former coming again to take place,
and be predominant, the latter followeth, by coherence of the matter
moved, in such manner, as water upon a plane table is drawn which way
any one part of it is guided by the finger. But because in sense, to one
and the same thing perceived, sometimes one thing, sometimes another
succeedeth, it comes to pass in time, that in the imagining of any
thing, there is no certainty what we shall imagine next; only this is
certain, it shall be something that succeeded the same before, at one
time or another.

[Sidenote: Train of thoughts unguided.]

This train of thoughts, or mental discourse, is of two sorts. The first
is _unguided_, _without design_, and inconstant; wherein there is no
passionate thought, to govern and direct those that follow, to itself,
as the end and scope of some desire, or other passion: in which case the
thoughts are said to wander, and seem impertinent one to another, as in
a dream. Such are commonly the thoughts of men, that are not only
without company, but also without care of any thing; though even then
their thoughts are as busy as at other times, but without harmony; as
the sound which a lute out of tune would yield to any man; or in tune,
to one that could not play. And yet in this wild ranging of the mind, a
man may oft-times perceive the way of it, and the dependance of one
thought upon another. For in a discourse of our present civil war, what
could seem more impertinent, than to ask, as one did, what was the value
of a Roman penny? Yet the coherence to me was manifest enough. For the
thought of the war, introduced the thought of the delivering up the king
to his enemies; the thought of that, brought in the thought of the
delivering up of Christ; and that again the thought of the thirty pence,
which was the price of that treason; and thence easily followed that
malicious question, and all this in a moment of time; for thought is
quick.

[Sidenote: Train of thoughts regulated.]

The second is more constant; as being _regulated_ by some desire, and
design. For the impression made by such things as we desire, or fear, is
strong, and permanent, or, if it cease for a time, of quick return: so
strong it is sometimes, as to hinder and break our sleep. From desire,
ariseth the thought of some means we have seen produce the like of that
which we aim at; and from the thought of that, the thought of means to
that mean; and so continually, till we come to some beginning within our
own power. And because the end, by the greatness of the impression,
comes often to mind, in case our thoughts begin to wander, they are
quickly again reduced into the way: which observed by one of the seven
wise men, made him give men this precept, which is now worn out,
_Respice finem_; that is to say, in all your actions, look often upon
what you would have, as the thing that directs all your thoughts in the
way to attain it.

The train of regulated thoughts is of two kinds; one, when of an effect
imagined we seek the causes, or means that produce it: and this is
common to man and beast. The other is, when imagining any thing
whatsoever, we seek all the possible effects, that can by it be
produced; that is to say, we imagine what we can do with it, when we
have it. Of which I have not at any time seen any sign, but in man only;
for this is a curiosity hardly incident to the nature of any living
creature that has no other passion but sensual, such as are hunger,
thirst, lust, and anger. In sum, the discourse of the mind, when it is
governed by design, is nothing but _seeking_, or the faculty of
invention, which the Latins called _sagacitas_, and _solertia_; a
hunting out of the causes, of some effect, present or past; or of the
effects, of some present or past cause. Sometimes a man seeks what he
hath lost; and from that place, and time, wherein he misses it, his mind
runs back, from place to place, and time to time, to find where, and
when he had it; that is to say, to find some certain, and limited time
and place, in which to begin a method of seeking. Again, from thence,
his thoughts run over the same places and times, to find what action, or
other occasion might make him lose it. [Sidenote: Remembrance.] This we
call _remembrance_, or calling to mind: the Latins call it
_reminiscentia_, as it were a _re-conning_ of our former actions.

[Sidenote: Prudence.]

Sometimes a man knows a place determinate, within the compass whereof he
is to seek; and then his thoughts run over all the parts thereof, in the
same manner as one would sweep a room, to find a jewel; or as a spaniel
ranges the field, till he find a scent; or as a man should run over the
alphabet, to start a rhyme.

Sometimes a man desires to know the event of an action; and then he
thinketh of some like action past, and the events thereof one after
another; supposing like events will follow like actions. As he that
foresees what will become of a criminal, re-cons what he has seen follow
on the like crime before; having this order of thoughts, the crime, the
officer, the prison, the judge, and the gallows. Which kind of thoughts,
is called _foresight_, and _prudence_, or _providence_; and sometimes
_wisdom_; though such conjecture, through the difficulty of observing
all circumstances, be very fallacious. But this is certain; by how much
one man has more experience of things past, than another, by so much
also he is more prudent, and his expectations the seldomer fail him. The
_present_ only has a being in nature; things _past_ have a being in the
memory only, but things _to come_ have no being at all; the _future_
being but a fiction of the mind, applying the sequels of actions past,
to the actions that are present; which with most certainty is done by
him that has most experience, but not with certainty enough. And though
it be called prudence, when the event answereth our expectation; yet in
its own nature, it is but presumption. For the foresight of things to
come, which is providence, belongs only to him by whose will they are to
come. From him only, and supernaturally, proceeds prophecy. The best
prophet naturally is the best guesser; and the best guesser, he that is
most versed and studied in the matters he guesses at: for he hath most
_signs_ to guess by.

[Sidenote: Signs.]

A _sign_ is the evident antecedent of the consequent; and contrarily,
the consequent of the antecedent, when the like consequences have been
observed, before: and the oftener they have been observed, the less
uncertain is the sign. And therefore he that has most experience in any
kind of business, has most signs, whereby to guess at the future time;
and consequently is the most prudent: and so much more prudent than he
that is new in that kind of business, as not to be equalled by any
advantage of natural and extemporary wit: though perhaps many young men
think the contrary.

Nevertheless it is not prudence that distinguisheth man from beast.
There be beasts, that at a year old observe more, and pursue that which
is for their good, more prudently, than a child can do at ten.

[Sidenote: Conjecture of the time past.]

As prudence is a _presumption_ of the _future_, contracted from the
_experience_ of time _past_: so there is a presumption of things past
taken from other things, not future, but past also. For he that hath
seen by what courses and degrees a flourishing state hath first come
into civil war, and then to ruin; upon the sight of the ruins of any
other state, will guess, the like war, and the like courses have been
there also. But this conjecture, has the same uncertainty almost with
the conjecture of the future; both being grounded only upon experience.

There is no other act of man’s mind, that I can remember, naturally
planted in him, so as to need no other thing, to the exercise of it, but
to be born a man, and live with the use of his five senses. Those other
faculties, of which I shall speak by and by, and which seem proper to
man only, are acquired and increased by study and industry; and of most
men learned by instruction, and discipline; and proceed all from the
invention of words, and speech. For besides sense, and thoughts, and the
train of thoughts, the mind of man has no other motion; though by the
help of speech, and method, the same faculties may be improved to such a
height, as to distinguish men from all other living creatures.

[Sidenote: Infinite.]

Whatsoever we imagine is _finite_. Therefore there is no idea, or
conception of any thing we call _infinite_. No man can have in his mind
an image of infinite magnitude; nor conceive infinite swiftness,
infinite time, or infinite force, or infinite power. When we say any
thing is infinite, we signify only, that we are not able to conceive the
ends, and bounds of the things named; having no conception of the thing,
but of our own inability. And therefore the name of God is used, not to
make us conceive him, for he is incomprehensible; and his greatness, and
power are unconceivable; but that we may honour him. Also because,
whatsoever, as I said before, we conceive, has been perceived first by
sense, either all at once, or by parts; a man can have no thought,
representing any thing, not subject to sense. No man therefore can
conceive any thing, but he must conceive it in some place; and indued
with some determinate magnitude; and which may be divided into parts;
nor that any thing is all in this place, and all in another place at the
same time; nor that two, or more things can be in one, and the same
place at once: for none of these things ever have, nor can be incident
to sense; but are absurd speeches, taken upon credit, without any
signification at all, from deceived philosophers, and deceived, or
deceiving schoolmen.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER IV.

                               OF SPEECH.


[Sidenote: Original of speech.]

The invention of _printing_, though ingenious, compared with the
invention of _letters_, is no great matter. But who was the first that
found the use of letters, is not known. He that first brought them into
Greece, men say was Cadmus, the son of Agenor, king of Phœnicia. A
profitable invention for continuing the memory of time past, and the
conjunction of mankind, dispersed into so many, and distant regions of
the earth; and withal difficult, as proceeding from a watchful
observation of the divers motions of the tongue, palate, lips, and other
organs of speech; whereby to make as many differences of characters, to
remember them. But the most noble and profitable invention of all other,
was that of SPEECH, consisting of _names_ or _appellations_, and their
connexion; whereby men register their thoughts; recall them when they
are past; and also declare them one to another for mutual utility and
conversation; without which, there had been amongst men, neither
commonwealth, nor society, nor contract, nor peace, no more than amongst
lions, bears, and wolves. The first author of _speech_ was God himself,
that instructed Adam how to name such creatures as he presented to his
sight; for the Scripture goeth no further in this matter. But this was
sufficient to direct him to add more names, as the experience and use of
the creatures should give him occasion; and to join them in such manner
by degrees, as to make himself understood; and so by succession of time,
so much language might be gotten, as he had found use for; though not so
copious, as an orator or philosopher has need of: for I do not find any
thing in the Scripture, out of which, directly or by consequence, can be
gathered, that Adam was taught the names of all figures, numbers,
measures, colours, sounds, fancies, relations; much less the names of
words and speech, as _general_, _special_, _affirmative_, _negative_,
_interrogative_, _optative_, _infinitive_, all which are useful; and
least of all, of _entity_, _intentionality_, _quiddity_, and other
insignificant words of the school.

But all this language gotten, and augmented by Adam and his posterity,
was again lost at the Tower of Babel, when, by the hand of God, every
man was stricken, for his rebellion, with an oblivion of his former
language. And being hereby forced to disperse themselves into several
parts of the world, it must needs be, that the diversity of tongues that
now is, proceeded by degrees from them, in such manner, as need, the
mother of all inventions, taught them; and in tract of time grew
everywhere more copious.

[Sidenote: The use of speech.]

The general use of speech, is to transfer our mental discourse, into
verbal; or the train of our thoughts, into a train of words; and that
for two commodities, whereof one is the registering of the consequences
of our thoughts; which being apt to slip out of our memory, and put us
to a new labour, may again be recalled, by such words as they were
marked by. So that the first use of names is to serve for _marks_, or
_notes_ of remembrance. Another is, when many use the same words, to
signify, by their connexion and order, one to another, what they
conceive, or think of each matter; and also what they desire, fear, or
have any other passion for. And for this use they are called _signs_.
Special uses of speech are these; first, to register, what by
cogitation, we find to be the cause of any thing, present or past; and
what we find things present or past may produce, or effect; which in
sum, is acquiring of arts. Secondly, to show to others that knowledge
which we have attained, which is, to counsel and teach one another.
Thirdly, to make known to others our wills and purposes, that we may
have the mutual help of one another. Fourthly, to please and delight
ourselves and others, by playing with our words, for pleasure or
ornament, innocently.

[Sidenote: Abuses of speech.]

To these uses, there are also four correspondent abuses. First, when men
register their thoughts wrong, by the inconstancy of the signification
of their words; by which they register for their conception, that which
they never conceived, and so deceive themselves. Secondly, when they use
words metaphorically; that is, in other sense than that they are
ordained for; and thereby deceive others. Thirdly, by words, when they
declare that to be their will, which is not. Fourthly, when they use
them to grieve one another; for seeing nature hath armed living
creatures, some with teeth, some with horns, and some with hands, to
grieve an enemy, it is but an abuse of speech, to grieve him with the
tongue, unless it be one whom we are obliged to govern; and then it is
not to grieve, but to correct and amend.

The manner how speech serveth to the remembrance of the consequence of
causes and effects, consisteth in the imposing of _names_, and the
_connexion_ of them.

[Sidenote: Names, proper and common.]

Of names, some are _proper_, and singular to one only thing, as _Peter_,
_John_, _this man_, _this tree_; and some are _common_ to many things,
_man_, _horse_, _tree_; every of which, though but one name, is
nevertheless the name of divers particular things; [Sidenote:
Universal.] in respect of all which together, it is called an
_universal_; there being nothing in the world universal but names; for
the things named are every one of them individual and singular.

One universal name is imposed on many things, for their similitude in
some quality, or other accident; and whereas a proper name bringeth to
mind one thing only, universals recall any one of those many.

And of names universal, some are of more, and some of less extent; the
larger comprehending the less large; and some again of equal extent,
comprehending each other reciprocally. As for example: the name _body_
is of larger signification than the word _man_, and comprehendeth it;
and the names _man_ and _rational_, are of equal extent, comprehending
mutually one another. But here we must take notice, that by a name is
not always understood, as in grammar, one only word; but sometimes, by
circumlocution, many words together. For all these words, _he that in
his actions observeth the laws of his country_, make but one name,
equivalent to this one word, _just_.

By this imposition of names, some of larger, some of stricter
signification, we turn the reckoning of the consequences of things
imagined in the mind, into a reckoning of the consequences of
appellations. For example: a man that hath no use of speech at all, such
as is born and remains perfectly deaf and dumb, if he set before his
eyes a triangle, and by it two right angles, such as are the corners of
a square figure, he may, by meditation, compare and find, that the three
angles of that triangle, are equal to those two right angles that stand
by it. But if another triangle be shown him, different in shape from the
former, he cannot know, without a new labour, whether the three angles
of that also be equal to the same. But he that hath the use of words,
when he observes, that such equality was consequent, not to the length
of the sides, nor to any other particular thing in his triangle; but
only to this, that the sides were straight, and the angles three; and
that that was all, for which he named it a triangle; will boldly
conclude universally, that such equality of angles is in all triangles
whatsoever; and register his invention in these general terms, _every
triangle hath its three angles equal to two right angles_. And thus the
consequence found in one particular, comes to be registered and
remembered, as a universal rule, and discharges our mental reckoning, of
time and place, and delivers us from all labour of the mind, saving the
first, and makes that which was found true _here_, and _now_, to be true
in _all times_ and _places_.

But the use of words in registering our thoughts is in nothing so
evident as in numbering. A natural fool that could never learn by heart
the order of numeral words, as _one_, _two_, and _three_, may observe
every stroke of the clock, and nod to it, or say _one_, _one_, _one_,
but can never know what hour it strikes. And it seems, there was a time
when those names of number were not in use; and men were fain to apply
their fingers of one or both hands, to those things they desired to keep
account of; and that thence it proceeded, that now our numeral words are
but ten, in any nation, and in some but five; and then they begin again.
And he that can tell ten, if he recite them out of order, will lose
himself, and not know when he has done. Much less will he be able to
add, and subtract, and perform all other operations of arithmetic. So
that without words there is no possibility of reckoning of numbers; much
less of magnitudes, of swiftness, of force, and other things, the
reckonings whereof are necessary to the being, or well-being of mankind.

When two names are joined together into a consequence, or affirmation,
as thus, _a man is a living creature_; or thus, _if he be a man, he is a
living creature_; if the latter name, _living creature_, signify all
that the former name _man_ signifieth, then the affirmation, or
consequence, is _true_; otherwise _false_. For _true_ and _false_ are
attributes of speech, not of things. And where speech is not, there is
neither _truth_ nor _falsehood_; _error_ there may be, as when we expect
that which shall not be, or suspect what has not been; but in neither
case can a man be charged with untruth.

[Sidenote: Necessity of definitions.]

Seeing then that truth consisteth in the right ordering of names in our
affirmations, a man that seeketh precise truth had need to remember what
every name he uses stands for, and to place it accordingly, or else he
will find himself entangled in words, as a bird in lime twigs, the more
he struggles the more belimed. And therefore in geometry, which is the
only science that it hath pleased God hitherto to bestow on mankind, men
begin at settling the significations of their words; which settling of
significations they call _definitions_, and place them in the beginning
of their reckoning.

By this it appears how necessary it is for any man that aspires to true
knowledge, to examine the definitions of former authors; and either to
correct them, where they are negligently set down, or to make them
himself. For the errors of definitions multiply themselves according as
the reckoning proceeds, and lead men into absurdities, which at last
they see, but cannot avoid, without reckoning anew from the beginning,
in which lies the foundation of their errors. From whence it happens,
that they which trust to books do as they that cast up many little sums
into a greater, without considering whether those little sums were
rightly cast up or not; and at last finding the error visible, and not
mistrusting their first grounds, know not which way to clear themselves,
but spend time in fluttering over their books; as birds that entering by
the chimney, and finding themselves enclosed in a chamber, flutter at
the false light of a glass window, for want of wit to consider which way
they came in. So that in the right definition of names lies the first
use of speech; which is the acquisition of science: and in wrong, or no
definitions, lies the first abuse; from which proceed all false and
senseless tenets; which make those men that take their instruction from
the authority of books, and not from their own meditation, to be as much
below the condition of ignorant men, as men endued with true science are
above it. For between true science and erroneous doctrines, ignorance is
in the middle. Natural sense and imagination are not subject to
absurdity. Nature itself cannot err; and as men abound in copiousness of
language, so they become more wise, or more mad than ordinary. Nor is it
possible without letters for any man to become either excellently wise,
or, unless his memory be hurt by disease or ill constitution of organs,
excellently foolish. For words are wise men’s counters, they do but
reckon by them; but they are the money of fools, that value them by the
authority of an Aristotle, a Cicero, or a Thomas, or any other doctor
whatsoever, if but a man.

[Sidenote: Subject to names.]

_Subject to names_, is whatsoever can enter into or be considered in an
account, and be added one to another to make a sum, or subtracted one
from another and leave a remainder. The Latins called accounts of money
_rationes_, and accounting _ratiocinatio_; and that which we in bills or
books of account call _items_, they call _nomina_, that is _names_; and
thence it seems to proceed, that they extended the word _ratio_ to the
faculty of reckoning in all other things. The Greeks have but one word,
λόγος, for both _speech_ and _reason_; not that they thought there was
no speech without reason, but no reasoning without speech: and the act
of reasoning they called _syllogism_, which signifieth summing up of the
consequences of one saying to another. And because the same thing may
enter into account for divers accidents, their names are, to show that
diversity, diversly wrested and diversified. This diversity of names may
be reduced to four general heads.

[Sidenote: Names.]

First, a thing may enter into account for _matter_ or _body_; as
_living_, _sensible_, _rational_, _hot_, _cold_, _moved_, _quiet_; with
all which names the word _matter_, or _body_, is understood; all such
being names of matter.

Secondly, it may enter into account, or be considered, for some accident
or quality which we conceive to be in it; as for _being moved_, for
_being so long_, for _being hot_, &c.; and then, of the name of the
thing itself, by a little change or wresting, we make a name for that
accident, which we consider; and for _living_ put into the account
_life_; for _moved_, _motion_; for _hot_, _heat_; for _long_, _length_,
and the like: and all such names are the names of the accidents and
properties by which one matter and body is distinguished from another.
These are called _names abstract_, because severed, not from matter, but
from the account of matter.

Thirdly, we bring into account the properties of our own bodies, whereby
we make such distinction; as when anything is seen by us, we reckon not
the thing itself, but the sight, the colour, the idea of it in the
fancy: and when anything is heard, we reckon it not, but the hearing or
sound only, which is our fancy or conception of it by the ear; and such
are names of fancies.

[Sidenote: Use of names positive.]

Fourthly, we bring into account, consider, and give names, to _names_
themselves, and to _speeches_: for _general_, _universal_, _special_,
_equivocal_, are names of names. And _affirmation_, _interrogation_,
_commandment_, _narration_, _syllogism_, _sermon_, _oration_, and many
other such, are names of speeches. And this is all the variety of names
_positive_; which are put to mark somewhat which is in nature, or may be
feigned by the mind of man, as bodies that are, or may be conceived to
be; or of bodies, the properties that are, or may be feigned to be; or
words and speech.

[Sidenote: Negative names, with their uses.]

There be also other names, called _negative_, which are notes to signify
that a word is not the name of the thing in question; as these words,
_nothing_, _no man_, _infinite_, _indocible_, _three want four_, and the
like; which are nevertheless of use in reckoning, or in correcting of
reckoning, and call to mind our past cogitations, though they be not
names of any thing, because they make us refuse to admit of names not
rightly used.

[Sidenote: Words insignificant.]

All other names are but insignificant sounds; and those of two sorts.
One when they are new, and yet their meaning not explained by
definition; whereof there have been abundance coined by schoolmen, and
puzzled philosophers.

Another, when men make a name of two names, whose significations are
contradictory and inconsistent; as this name, an _incorporeal body_, or,
which is all one, an _incorporeal substance_, and a great number more.
For whensoever any affirmation is false, the two names of which it is
composed, put together and made one, signify nothing at all. For
example, if it be a false affirmation to say _a quadrangle is round_,
the word _round quadrangle_ signifies nothing, but is a mere sound. So
likewise, if it be false to say that virtue can be poured, or blown up
and down, the words _in-poured virtue_, _inblown virtue_, are as absurd
and insignificant as a _round quadrangle_. And therefore you shall
hardly meet with a senseless and insignificant word, that is not made up
of some Latin or Greek names. A Frenchman seldom hears our Saviour
called by the name of _parole_, but by the name of _verbe_ often; yet
_verbe_ and _parole_ differ no more, but that one is Latin, the other
French.

[Sidenote: Understanding.]

When a man, upon the hearing of any speech, hath those thoughts which
the words of that speech and their connexion were ordained and
constituted to signify, then he is said to understand it;
_understanding_ being nothing else but conception caused by speech. And
therefore if speech be peculiar to man, as for aught I know it is, then
is understanding peculiar to him also. And therefore of absurd and false
affirmations, in case they be universal, there can be no understanding;
though many think they understand then, when they do but repeat the
words softly, or con them in their mind.

What kinds of speeches signify the appetites, aversions, and passions of
man’s mind; and of their use and abuse, I shall speak when I have spoken
of the passions.

[Sidenote: Inconstant names.]

The names of such things as affect us, that is, which please and
displease us, because all men be not alike affected with the same thing,
nor the same man at all times, are in the common discourses of men of
_inconstant_ signification. For seeing all names are imposed to signify
our conceptions, and all our affections are but conceptions, when we
conceive the same things differently, we can hardly avoid different
naming of them. For though the nature of that we conceive, be the same;
yet the diversity of our reception of it, in respect of different
constitutions of body, and prejudices of opinion, gives every thing a
tincture of our different passions. And therefore in reasoning a man
must take heed of words; which besides the signification of what we
imagine of their nature, have a signification also of the nature,
disposition, and interest of the speaker; such as are the names of
virtues and vices; for one man calleth _wisdom_, what another calleth
_fear_; and one _cruelty_, what another _justice_; one _prodigality_,
what another _magnanimity_; and one _gravity_, what another _stupidity_,
&c. And therefore such names can never be true grounds of any
ratiocination. No more can metaphors, and tropes of speech; but these
are less dangerous, because they profess their inconstancy; which the
other do not.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER V.

                         OF REASON AND SCIENCE.


[Sidenote: Reason, what it is.]

When a man _reasoneth_, he does nothing else but conceive a sum total,
from _addition_ of parcels; or conceive a remainder, from _subtraction_
of one sum from another; which, if it be done by words, is conceiving of
the consequence of the names of all the parts, to the name of the whole;
or from the names of the whole and one part, to the name of the other
part. And though in some things, as in numbers, besides adding and
subtracting, men name other operations, as _multiplying_ and _dividing_,
yet they are the same; for multiplication, is but adding together of
things equal; and division, but subtracting of one thing, as often as we
can. These operations are not incident to numbers only, but to all
manner of things that can be added together, and taken one out of
another. For as arithmeticians teach to add and subtract in _numbers_;
so the geometricians teach the same in _lines_, _figures_, solid and
superficial, _angles_, _proportions_, _times_, degrees of _swiftness_,
_force_, _power_, and the like; the logicians teach the same in
_consequences of words_; adding together two _names_ to make an
_affirmation_, and two _affirmations_ to make a _syllogism_; and _many
syllogisms_ to make a _demonstration_; and from the _sum_, or
_conclusion_ of a _syllogism_, they subtract one _proposition_ to find
the other. Writers of politics add together _pactions_ to find men’s
_duties_; and lawyers, _laws_ and _facts_, to find what is _right_ and
_wrong_ in the actions of private men. In sum, in what matter soever
there is place for _addition_ and _subtraction_, there also is place for
_reason_; and where these have no place, there _reason_ has nothing at
all to do.

[Sidenote: Reason defined.]

Out of all which we may define, that is to say determine, what that is,
which is meant by this word _reason_, when we reckon it amongst the
faculties of the mind. For REASON, in this sense, is nothing but
_reckoning_, that is adding and subtracting, of the consequences of
general names agreed upon for the _marking_ and _signifying_ of our
thoughts; I say _marking_ them when we reckon by ourselves, and
_signifying_, when we demonstrate or approve our reckonings to other
men.

[Sidenote: Right reason, where.]

And, as in arithmetic, unpractised men must, and professors themselves
may often, err, and cast up false; so also in any other subject of
reasoning, the ablest, most attentive, and most practised men may
deceive themselves, and infer false conclusions; not but that reason
itself is always right reason, as well as arithmetic is a certain and
infallible art: but no one man’s reason, nor the reason of any one
number of men, makes the certainty; no more than an account is therefore
well cast up, because a great many men have unanimously approved it. And
therefore, as when there is a controversy in an account, the parties
must by their own accord, set up, for right reason, the reason of some
arbitrator, or judge, to whose sentence they will both stand, or their
controversy must either come to blows, or be undecided, for want of a
right reason constituted by nature; so is it also in all debates of what
kind soever. And when men that think themselves wiser than all others,
clamour and demand right reason for judge, yet seek no more, but that
things should be determined, by no other men’s reason but their own, it
is as intolerable in the society of men, as it is in play after trump is
turned, to use for trump on every occasion, that suite whereof they have
most in their hand. For they do nothing else, that will have every of
their passions, as it comes to bear sway in them, to be taken for right
reason, and that in their own controversies bewraying their want of
right reason, by the claim they lay to it.

[Sidenote: The use of reason.]

The use and end of reason, is not the finding of the sum and truth of
one, or a few consequences, remote from the first definitions, and
settled significations of names, but to begin at these, and proceed from
one consequence to another. For there can be no certainty of the last
conclusion, without a certainty of all those affirmations and negations,
on which it was grounded and inferred. As when a master of a family, in
taking an account, casteth up the sums of all the bills of expense into
one sum, and not regarding how each bill is summed up, by those that
give them in account; nor what it is he pays for; he advantages himself
no more, than if he allowed the account in gross, trusting to every of
the accountants’ skill and honesty: so also in reasoning of all other
things, he that takes up conclusions on the trust of authors, and doth
not fetch them from the first items in every reckoning, which are the
significations of names settled by definitions, loses his labour; and
does not know anything, but only believeth.

[Sidenote: Of error and absurdity.]

When a man reckons without the use of words, which may be done in
particular things, as when upon the sight of any one thing, we
conjecture what was likely to have preceded, or is likely to follow upon
it; if that which he thought likely to follow, follows not, or that
which he thought likely to have preceded it, hath not preceded it, this
is called _error_; to which even the most prudent men are subject. But
when we reason in words of general signification, and fall upon a
general inference which is false, though it be commonly called _error_,
it is indeed an _absurdity_, or senseless speech. For error is but a
deception, in presuming that somewhat is past, or to come; of which,
though it were not past, or not to come, yet there was no impossibility
discoverable. But when we make a general assertion, unless it be a true
one, the possibility of it is inconceivable. And words whereby we
conceive nothing but the sound, are those we call _absurd_,
_insignificant_, and _nonsense_. And therefore if a man should talk to
me of a _round quadrangle_; or, _accidents of bread in cheese_; or,
_immaterial substances_; or of _a free subject_; _a free will_; or any
_free_, but free from being hindered by opposition, I should not say he
were in an error, but that his words were without meaning, that is to
say, absurd.

I have said before, in the second chapter, that a man did excel all
other animals in this faculty, that when he conceived any thing
whatsoever, he was apt to inquire the consequences of it, and what
effects he could do with it. And now I add this other degree of the same
excellence, that he can by words reduce the consequences he finds to
general rules, called _theorems_, or _aphorisms_; that is, he can
reason, or reckon, not only in number, but in all other things, whereof
one may be added unto, or subtracted from another.

But this privilege is allayed by another; and that is, by the privilege
of absurdity; to which no living creature is subject, but man only. And
of men, those are of all most subject to it, that profess philosophy.
For it is most true that Cicero saith of them somewhere; that there can
be nothing so absurd, but may be found in the books of philosophers. And
the reason is manifest. For there is not one of them that begins his
ratiocination from the definitions, or explications of the names they
are to use; which is a method that hath been used only in geometry;
whose conclusions have thereby been made indisputable.

[Sidenote: Causes of absurdity.]

I. The first cause of absurd conclusions I ascribe to the want of
method; in that they begin not their ratiocination from definitions;
that is, from settled significations of their words: as if they could
cast account, without knowing the value of the numeral words, _one_,
_two_, and _three_. And whereas all bodies enter into account upon
divers considerations, which I have mentioned in the precedent chapter;
these considerations being diversely named, divers absurdities proceed
from the confusion, and unfit connexion of their names into assertions.
And therefore,

II. The second cause of absurd assertions, I ascribe to the giving of
names of _bodies_ to _accidents_; or of _accidents_ to _bodies_; as they
do, that say, _faith is infused_, or _inspired_; when nothing can be
_poured_, or _breathed_ into anything, but body; and that, _extension_
is _body_; that _phantasms_ are _spirits_, &c.

III. The third I ascribe to the giving of the names of the _accidents_
of _bodies without us_, to the _accidents_ of our _own bodies_; as they
do that say, the _colour is in the body_; _the sound is in the air_, &c.

IV. The fourth, to the giving of the names of _bodies_ to _names_, or
_speeches_; as they do that say, that _there be things universal_; that
_a living creature is genus_, or _a general thing_, &c.

V. The fifth, to the giving of the names of _accidents_ to _names_ and
_speeches_; as they do that say, _the nature of a thing is its
definition_; _a man’s command is his will_; and the like.

VI. The sixth, to the use of metaphors, tropes, and other rhetorical
figures, instead of words proper. For though it be lawful to say, for
example, in common speech, _the way goeth, or leadeth hither, or
thither_; _the proverb says this or that_, whereas ways cannot go, nor
proverbs speak; yet in reckoning, and seeking of truth, such speeches
are not to be admitted.

VII. The seventh, to names that signify nothing; but are taken up, and
learned by rote from the schools, as _hypostatical_, _transubstantiate_,
_consubstantiate_, _eternal-now_, and the like canting of schoolmen.

To him that can avoid these things it is not easy to fall into any
absurdity, unless it be by the length of an account; wherein he may
perhaps forget what went before. For all men by nature reason alike, and
well, when they have good principles. For who is so stupid, as both to
mistake in geometry, and also to persist in it, when another detects his
error to him?

[Sidenote: Science.]

By this it appears that reason is not, as sense and memory, born with
us; nor gotten by experience only, as prudence is; but attained by
industry; first in apt imposing of names; and secondly by getting a good
and orderly method in proceeding from the elements, which are names, to
assertions made by connexion of one of them to another; and so to
syllogisms, which are the connexions of one assertion to another, till
we come to a knowledge of all the consequences of names appertaining to
the subject in hand; and that is it, men call SCIENCE. And whereas sense
and memory are but knowledge of fact, which is a thing past and
irrevocable. _Science_ is the knowledge of consequences, and dependance
of one fact upon another: by which, out of that we can presently do, we
know how to do something else when we will, or the like another time;
because when we see how any thing comes about, upon what causes, and by
what manner; when the like causes come into our power, we see how to
make it produce the like effects.

Children therefore are not endued with reason at all, till they have
attained the use of speech; but are called reasonable creatures, for the
possibility apparent of having the use of reason in time to come. And
the most part of men, though they have the use of reasoning a little
way, as in numbering to some degree; yet it serves them to little use in
common life; in which they govern themselves, some better, some worse,
according to their differences of experience, quickness of memory, and
inclinations to several ends; but specially according to good or evil
fortune, and the errors of one another. For as for _science_, or certain
rules of their actions, they are so far from it, that they know not what
it is. Geometry they have thought conjuring: but for other sciences,
they who have not been taught the beginnings and some progress in them,
that they may see how they be acquired and generated, are in this point
like children, that having no thought of generation, are made believe by
the women that their brothers and sisters are not born, but found in the
garden.

But yet they that have no _science_, are in better, and nobler
condition, with their natural prudence; than men, that by mis-reasoning,
or by trusting them that reason wrong, fall upon false and absurd
general rules. For ignorance of causes, and of rules, does not set men
so far out of their way, as relying on false rules, and taking for
causes of what they aspire to, those that are not so, but rather causes
of the contrary.

To conclude, the light of human minds is perspicuous words, but by exact
definitions first snuffed, and purged from ambiguity; _reason_ is the
_pace_; increase of _science_, the _way_; and the benefit of mankind,
the _end_. And, on the contrary, metaphors, and senseless and ambiguous
words, are like _ignes fatui_; and reasoning upon them is wandering
amongst innumerable absurdities; and their end, contention and sedition,
or contempt.

[Sidenote: Prudence and sapience, with their difference.]

As much experience, is _prudence_; so, is much science _sapience_. For
though we usually have one name of wisdom for them both, yet the Latins
did always distinguish between _prudentia_ and _sapientia_; ascribing
the former to experience, the latter to science. But to make their
difference appear more clearly, let us suppose one man endued with an
excellent natural use and dexterity in handling his arms; and another to
have added to that dexterity, an acquired science, of where he can
offend, or be offended by his adversary, in every possible posture or
guard: the ability of the former, would be to the ability of the latter,
as prudence to sapience; both useful; but the latter infallible. But
they that trusting only to the authority of books, follow the blind
blindly, are like him that, trusting to the false rules of a master of
fence, ventures presumptuously upon an adversary, that either kills or
disgraces him.

[Sidenote: Signs of science.]

The signs of science are some, certain and infallible; some, uncertain.
Certain, when he that pretendeth the science of any thing, can teach the
same; that is to say, demonstrate the truth thereof perspicuously to
another; uncertain, when only some particular events answer to his
pretence, and upon many occasions prove so as he says they must. Signs
of prudence are all uncertain; because to observe by experience, and
remember all circumstances that may alter the success, is impossible.
But in any business, whereof a man has not infallible science to proceed
by; to forsake his own natural judgment, and be guided by general
sentences read in authors, and subject to many exceptions, is a sign of
folly, and generally scorned by the name of pedantry. And even of those
men themselves, that in councils of the commonwealth love to show their
reading of politics and history, very few do it in their domestic
affairs, where their particular interest is concerned; having prudence
enough for their private affairs: but in public they study more the
reputation of their own wit, than the success of another’s business.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER VI.

OF THE INTERIOR BEGINNINGS OF VOLUNTARY MOTIONS; COMMONLY CALLED THE
    PASSIONS; AND THE SPEECHES BY WHICH THEY ARE EXPRESSED.


[Sidenote: Motion, vital and animal.]

There be in animals, two sorts of _motions_ peculiar to them: one called
_vital_; begun in generation, and continued without interruption through
their whole life; such as are the _course_ of the _blood_, the _pulse_,
the _breathing_, the _concoction_, _nutrition_, _excretion_, &c. to
which motions there needs no help of imagination: the other is _animal
motion_, otherwise called _voluntary motion_; as to _go_, to _speak_, to
_move_ any of our limbs, in such manner as is first fancied in our
minds. That sense is motion in the organs and interior parts of man’s
body, caused by the action of the things we see, hear, &c.; and that
fancy is but the relics of the same motion, remaining after sense, has
been already said in the first and second chapters. And because _going_,
_speaking_, and the like voluntary motions, depend always upon a
precedent thought of _whither_, _which way_, and _what_; it is evident,
that the imagination is the first internal beginning of all voluntary
motion. And although unstudied men do not conceive any motion at all to
be there, where the thing moved is invisible; or the space it is moved
in is, for the shortness of it, insensible; yet that doth not hinder,
but that such motions are. For let a space be never so little, that
which is moved over a greater space, whereof that little one is part,
must first be moved over that. [Sidenote: Endeavour.] These small
beginnings of motion, within the body of man, before they appear in
walking, speaking, striking, and other visible actions, are commonly
called ENDEAVOUR.

[Sidenote: Appetite. Desire.]

This endeavour, when it is toward something which causes it, is called
APPETITE, or DESIRE; the latter, being the general name; [Sidenote:
Hunger. Thirst.] and the other oftentimes restrained to signify the
desire of food, namely _hunger_ and _thirst_. [Sidenote: Aversion.] And
when the endeavour is fromward something, it is generally called
AVERSION. These words, _appetite_ and _aversion_, we have from the
Latins; and they both of them signify the motions, one of approaching,
the other of retiring. So also do the Greek words for the same, which
are ὁρμὴ and ἀφορμὴ. For nature itself does often press upon men those
truths, which afterwards, when they look for somewhat beyond nature,
they stumble at. For the Schools find in mere appetite to go, or move,
no actual motion at all: but because some motion they must acknowledge,
they call it metaphorical motion; which is but an absurd speech: for
though words may be called metaphorical; bodies and motions can not.

[Sidenote: Love. Hate.]

That which men desire, they are also said to LOVE: and to HATE those
things for which they have aversion. So that desire and love are the
same thing; save that by desire, we always signify the absence of the
object; by love, most commonly the presence of the same. So also by
aversion, we signify the absence; and by hate, the presence of the
object.

Of appetites and aversions, some are born with men; as appetite of food,
appetite of excretion, and exoneration, which may also and more properly
be called aversions, from somewhat they feel in their bodies; and some
other appetites, not many. The rest, which are appetites of particular
things, proceed from experience, and trial of their effects upon
themselves or other men. For of things we know not at all, or believe
not to be, we can have no further desire, than to taste and try. But
aversion we have for things, not only which we know have hurt us, but
also that we do not know whether they will hurt us, or not.

[Sidenote: Contempt.]

Those things which we neither desire, nor hate, we are said to
_contemn_; CONTEMPT being nothing else but an immobility, or contumacy
of the heart, in resisting the action of certain things; and proceeding
from that the heart is already moved otherwise, by other more potent
objects; or from want of experience of them.

And because the constitution of a man’s body is in continual mutation,
it is impossible that all the same things should always cause in him the
same appetites, and aversions: much less can all men consent, in the
desire of almost any one and the same object.

[Sidenote: Good.]

But whatsoever is the object of any man’s appetite or desire, that is it
which he for his part calleth _good_: [Sidenote: Evil.] and the object
of his hate and aversion, _evil_; and of his contempt, _vile_ and
_inconsiderable_. For these words of good, evil, and contemptible, are
ever used with relation to the person that useth them: there being
nothing simply and absolutely so; nor any common rule of good and evil,
to be taken from the nature of the objects themselves; but from the
person of the man, where there is no commonwealth; or, in a
commonwealth, from the person that representeth it; or from an
arbitrator or judge, whom men disagreeing shall by consent set up, and
make his sentence the rule thereof.

[Sidenote: Pulchrum.]

[Sidenote: Turpe.]

The Latin tongue has two words, whose significations approach to those
of good and evil; but are not precisely the same; and those are
_pulchrum_ and _turpe_. Whereof the former signifies that, which by some
apparent signs promiseth good; and the latter, that which promiseth
evil. But in our tongue we have not so general names to express them by.
But for _pulchrum_ we say in some things, _fair_; in others,
_beautiful_, or _handsome_, or _gallant_, or _honourable_, or _comely_,
or _amiable_; and for _turpe_, _foul_, _deformed_, _ugly_, _base_,
_nauseous_, and the like, as the subject shall require; all which words,
in their proper places, signify nothing else but the _mien_, or
countenance, that promiseth good and evil. So that of good there be
three kinds; good in the promise, that is _pulchrum_; good in effect, as
the end desired, which is called _jucundum_, [Sidenote: Delightful.
Profitable. Unpleasant. Unprofitable.] _delightful_; and good as the
means, which is called _utile_, _profitable_; and as many of evil: for
_evil_ in promise, is that they call _turpe_; evil in effect, and end,
is _molestum_, _unpleasant_, _troublesome_; and evil in the means,
_inutile_, _unprofitable_, _hurtful_.

[Sidenote: Delight. Displeasure.]

As, in sense, that which is really within us, is, as I have said before,
only motion, caused by the action of external objects, but in apparence;
to the sight, light and colour; to the ear, sound; to the nostril,
odour, &c.: so, when the action of the same object is continued from the
eyes, ears, and other organs to the heart, the real effect there is
nothing but motion, or endeavour; which consisteth in appetite, or
aversion, to or from the object moving. But the apparence, or sense of
that motion, is that we either call _delight_, or _trouble of mind_.

[Sidenote: Pleasure.]

This motion, which is called appetite, and for the apparence of it
_delight_, and _pleasure_, seemeth to be a corroboration of vital
motion, and a help thereunto; and therefore such things as caused
delight, were not improperly called _jucunda_, _à juvando_, from helping
or fortifying; [Sidenote: Offence.] and the contrary, _molesta_,
_offensive_, from hindering, and troubling the motion vital.

_Pleasure_ therefore, or _delight_, is the apparence, or sense of good;
and _molestation_, or _displeasure_, the apparence, or sense of evil.
And consequently all appetite, desire, and love, is accompanied with
some delight more or less; and all hatred and aversion, with more or
less displeasure and offence.

[Sidenote: Pleasures of sense.]

Of pleasures or delights, some arise from the sense of an object
present; and those may be called _pleasure of sense_; the word
_sensual_, as it is used by those only that condemn them, having no
place till there be laws. Of this kind are all onerations and
exonerations of the body; as also all that is pleasant, in the _sight_,
_hearing_, _smell_, _taste_, or _touch_. Others arise from the
expectation, that proceeds from foresight of the end, or consequence of
things; whether those things in the sense please or displease.
[Sidenote: Pleasures of the mind.] And these are _pleasures of the mind_
of him that draweth those consequences, [Sidenote: Joy.] and are
generally called JOY. In the like manner, displeasures are some in the
sense, [Sidenote: Pain.] and called PAIN; others in the expectation of
consequences, [Sidenote: Grief.] and are called GRIEF.

These simple passions called _appetite_, _desire_, _love_, _aversion_,
_hate_, _joy_, and _grief_, have their names for divers considerations
diversified. As first, when they one succeed another, they are diversely
called from the opinion men have of the likelihood of attaining what
they desire. Secondly, from the object loved or hated. Thirdly, from the
consideration of many of them together. Fourthly, from the alteration or
succession itself.

[Sidenote: Hope.]

For _appetite_, with an opinion of attaining, is called HOPE.

[Sidenote: Despair.]

The same, without such opinion, DESPAIR.

[Sidenote: Fear.]

_Aversion_, with opinion of HURT from the object, FEAR.

[Sidenote: Courage.]

The same, with hope of avoiding that hurt by resistance, COURAGE.

[Sidenote: Anger.]

Sudden _courage_, ANGER.

[Sidenote: Confidence.]

Constant _hope_, CONFIDENCE of ourselves.

[Sidenote: Diffidence.]

Constant _despair_, DIFFIDENCE of ourselves.

[Sidenote: Indignation.]

_Anger_ for great hurt done to another, when we conceive the same to be
done by injury, INDIGNATION.

[Sidenote: Benevolence.]

_Desire_ of good to another, BENEVOLENCE, GOOD WILL, CHARITY. [Sidenote:
Good nature.] If to man generally, GOOD NATURE.

[Sidenote: Covetousness.]

_Desire_ of riches, COVETOUSNESS; a name used always in signification of
blame; because men contending for them, are displeased with one another
attaining them; though the desire in itself, be to be blamed, or
allowed, according to the means by which these riches are sought.

[Sidenote: Ambition.]

_Desire_ of office, or precedence, AMBITION: a name used also in the
worse sense, for the reason before mentioned.

[Sidenote: Pusillanimity.]

_Desire_ of things that conduce but a little to our ends, and fear of
things that are but of little hindrance, PUSILLANIMITY.

[Sidenote: Magnanimity.]

_Contempt_ of little helps and hindrances, MAGNANIMITY.

[Sidenote: Valour.]

_Magnanimity_, in danger of death or wounds, VALOUR, FORTITUDE.

[Sidenote: Liberality.]

_Magnanimity_ in the use of riches, LIBERALITY.

[Sidenote: Miserableness.]

_Pusillanimity_ in the same, WRETCHEDNESS, MISERABLENESS, or PARSIMONY;
as it is liked or disliked.

[Sidenote: Kindness.]

_Love_ of persons for society, KINDNESS.

[Sidenote: Natural lust.]

_Love_ of persons for pleasing the sense only, NATURAL LUST.

[Sidenote: Luxury.]

_Love_ of the same, acquired from rumination, that is, imagination of
pleasure past, LUXURY.

[Sidenote: The passion of love.]

[Sidenote: Jealousy.]

_Love_ of one singularly, with desire to be singularly beloved, THE
PASSION OF LOVE. The same, with fear that the love is not mutual,
JEALOUSY.

[Sidenote: Revengefulness.]

_Desire_, by doing hurt to another, to make him condemn some fact of his
own, REVENGEFULNESS.

[Sidenote: Curiosity.]

_Desire_ to know why, and how, CURIOSITY; such as is in no living
creature but _man_: so that man is distinguished, not only by his
reason, but also by this singular passion from other _animals_; in whom
the appetite of food, and other pleasures of sense, by predominance,
take away the care of knowing causes; which is a lust of the mind, that
by a perseverance of delight in the continual and indefatigable
generation of knowledge, exceedeth the short vehemence of any carnal
pleasure.

[Sidenote: Religion.]

[Sidenote: Superstition.]

[Sidenote: True religion.]

_Fear_ of power invisible, feigned by the mind, or imagined from tales
publicly allowed, RELIGION; not allowed, SUPERSTITION. And when the
power imagined, is truly such as we imagine, TRUE RELIGION.

[Sidenote: Panic terror.]

_Fear_, without the apprehension of why, or what, PANIC TERROR, called
so from the fables, that make Pan the author of them; whereas, in truth,
there is always in him that so feareth, first, some apprehension of the
cause, though the rest run away by example, every one supposing his
fellow to know why. And therefore this passion happens to none but in a
throng, or multitude of people.

[Sidenote: Admiration.]

_Joy_, from apprehension of novelty, ADMIRATION; proper to man, because
it excites the appetite of knowing the cause.

[Sidenote: Glory.]

_Joy_, arising from imagination of a man’s own power and ability, is
that exultation of the mind which is called GLORYING: which if grounded
upon the experience of his own former actions, is the same with
_confidence_: [Sidenote: Vain-glory.] but if grounded on the flattery of
others; or only supposed by himself, for delight in the consequences of
it, is called VAIN-GLORY: which name is properly given; because a well
grounded _confidence_ begetteth attempt; whereas the supposing of power
does not, and is therefore rightly called _vain_.

[Sidenote: Dejection.]

_Grief_, from opinion of want of power, is called DEJECTION of mind.

The _vain-glory_ which consisteth in the feigning or supposing of
abilities in ourselves, which we know are not, is most incident to young
men, and nourished by the histories, or fictions of gallant persons; and
is corrected oftentimes by age, and employment.

[Sidenote: Sudden glory.]

[Sidenote: Laughter.]

_Sudden glory_, is the passion which maketh those _grimaces_ called
LAUGHTER; and is caused either by some sudden act of their own, that
pleaseth them; or by the apprehension of some deformed thing in another,
by comparison whereof they suddenly applaud themselves. And it is
incident most to them, that are conscious of the fewest abilities in
themselves; who are forced to keep themselves in their own favour, by
observing the imperfections of other men. And therefore much laughter at
the defects of others, is a sign of pusillanimity. For of great minds,
one of the proper works is, to help and free others from scorn; and
compare themselves only with the most able.

[Sidenote: Sudden dejection.]

[Sidenote: Weeping.]

On the contrary, _sudden dejection_, is the passion that causeth
WEEPING; and is caused by such accidents, as suddenly take away some
vehement hope, or some prop of their power: and they are most subject to
it, that rely principally on helps external, such as are women, and
children. Therefore some weep for the loss of friends; others for their
unkindness; others for the sudden stop made to their thoughts of
revenge, by reconciliation. But in all cases, both laughter, and
weeping, are sudden motions; custom taking them both away. For no man
laughs at old jests; or weeps for an old calamity.

[Sidenote: Shame.
           Blushing.]

_Grief_, for the discovery of some defect of ability, is SHAME, or the
passion that discovereth itself in BLUSHING; and consisteth in the
apprehension of some thing dishonourable; and in young men, is a sign of
the love of good reputation, and commendable: in old men it is a sign of
the same; but because it comes too late, not commendable.

[Sidenote: Impudence.]

The _contempt_ of good reputation is called IMPUDENCE.

[Sidenote: Pity.]

_Grief_, for the calamity of another, is PITY; and ariseth from the
imagination that the like calamity may befall himself; and therefore is
called also COMPASSION, and in the phrase of this present time a
FELLOW-FEELING: and therefore for calamity arriving from great
wickedness, the best men have the least pity; and for the same calamity,
those hate pity, that think themselves least obnoxious to the same.

[Sidenote: Cruelty.]

_Contempt_, or little sense of the calamity of others, is that which men
call CRUELTY; proceeding from security of their own fortune. For, that
any man should take pleasure in other men’s great harms; without other
end of his own, I do not conceive it possible.

[Sidenote: Emulation.]

[Sidenote: Envy.]

_Grief_, for the success of a competitor in wealth, honour, or other
good, if it be joined with endeavour to enforce our own abilities to
equal or exceed him, is called EMULATION: but joined with endeavour to
supplant, or hinder a competitor, ENVY.

[Sidenote: Deliberation.]

When in the mind of man, appetites, and aversions, hopes, and fears,
concerning one and the same thing, arise alternately; and divers good
and evil consequences of the doing, or omitting the thing propounded,
come successively into our thoughts; so that sometimes we have an
appetite to it; sometimes an aversion from it; sometimes hope to be able
to do it; sometimes despair, or fear to attempt it; the whole sum of
desires, aversions, hopes and fears continued till the thing be either
done, or thought impossible, is that we call DELIBERATION.

Therefore of things past, there is no _deliberation_; because manifestly
impossible to be changed: nor of things known to be impossible, or
thought so; because men know, or think such deliberation vain. But of
things impossible, which we think possible, we may deliberate; not
knowing it is in vain. And it is called _deliberation_; because it is a
putting an end to the _liberty_ we had of doing, or omitting, according
to our own appetite, or aversion.

This alternate succession of appetites, aversions, hopes and fears, is
no less in other living creatures than in man: and therefore beasts also
deliberate.

Every _deliberation_ is then said to _end_, when that whereof they
deliberate, is either done, or thought impossible; because till then we
retain the liberty of doing, or omitting; according to our appetite, or
aversion.

[Sidenote: The will.]

In _deliberation_, the last appetite, or aversion, immediately adhering
to the action, or to the omission thereof, is that we call the WILL; the
act, not the faculty, of _willing_. And beasts that have _deliberation_,
must necessarily also have _will_. The definition of the _will_, given
commonly by the Schools, that it is a _rational appetite_, is not good.
For if it were, then could there be no voluntary act against reason. For
a _voluntary act_ is that, which proceedeth from the _will_, and no
other. But if instead of a rational appetite, we shall say an appetite
resulting from a precedent deliberation, then the definition is the same
that I have given here. _Will_ therefore _is the last appetite in
deliberating_. And though we say in common discourse, a man had a will
once to do a thing, that nevertheless he forbore to do; yet that is
properly but an inclination, which makes no action voluntary; because
the action depends not of it, but of the last inclination, or appetite.
For if the intervenient appetites, make any action voluntary; then by
the same reason all intervenient aversions, should make the same action
involuntary; and so one and the same action, should be both voluntary
and involuntary.

By this it is manifest, that not only actions that have their beginning
from covetousness, ambition, lust, or other appetites to the thing
propounded; but also those that have their beginning from aversion, or
fear of those consequences that follow the omission, are _voluntary
actions_.

[Sidenote: Forms of speech, in passion.]

The forms of speech by which the passions are expressed, are partly the
same, and partly different from those, by which we express our thoughts.
And first, generally all passions may be expressed _indicatively_; as _I
love_, _I fear_, _I joy_, _I deliberate_, _I will_, _I command_: but
some of them have particular expressions by themselves, which
nevertheless are not affirmations, unless it be when they serve to make
other inferences, besides that of the passion they proceed from.
Deliberation is expressed _subjunctively_; which is a speech proper to
signify suppositions, with their consequences; as, _if this be done,
then this will follow_; and differs not from the language of reasoning,
save that reasoning is in general words; but deliberation for the most
part is of particulars. The language of desire, and aversion, is
_imperative_; as _do this_, _forbear that_; which when the party is
obliged to do, or forbear, is _command_; otherwise _prayer_; or else
_counsel_. The language of vain-glory, of indignation, pity and
revengefulness, _optative_: but of the desire to know, there is a
peculiar expression, called _interrogative_; as, _what is it_, _when
shall it_, _how is it done_, and _why so?_ other language of the
passions I find none: for cursing, swearing, reviling, and the like, do
not signify as speech; but as the actions of a tongue accustomed.

These forms of speech, I say, are expressions, or voluntary
significations of our passions: but certain signs they be not; because
they may be used arbitrarily, whether they that use them, have such
passions or not. The best signs of passions present, are either in the
countenance, motions of the body, actions, and ends, or aims, which we
otherwise know the man to have.

[Sidenote: Good and evil apparent.]

And because in deliberation, the appetites, and aversions, are raised by
foresight of the good and evil consequences, and sequels of the action
whereof we deliberate; the good or evil effect thereof dependeth on the
foresight of a long chain of consequences, of which very seldom any man
is able to see to the end. But for so far as a man seeth, if the good in
those consequences be greater than the evil, the whole chain is that
which writers call _apparent_, or _seeming good_. And contrarily, when
the evil exceedeth the good, the whole is _apparent_, or _seeming evil_:
so that he who hath by experience, or reason, the greatest and surest
prospect of consequences, deliberates best himself; and is able when he
will, to give the best counsel unto others.

[Sidenote: Felicity.]

_Continual success_ in obtaining those things which a man from time to
time desireth, that is to say, continual prospering, is that men call
FELICITY; I mean the felicity of this life. For there is no such thing
as perpetual tranquillity of mind, while we live here; because life
itself is but motion, and can never be without desire, nor without fear,
no more than without sense. What kind of felicity God hath ordained to
them that devoutly honour Him, a man shall no sooner know, than enjoy;
being joys, that now are as incomprehensible, as the word of school-men
_beatifical vision_ is unintelligible.

[Sidenote: Praise.]

The form of speech whereby men signify their opinion of the goodness of
any thing, is PRAISE. [Sidenote: Magnification.] That whereby they
signify the power and greatness of any thing, is MAGNIFYING. [Sidenote:
Μακαρισμός.] And that whereby they signify the opinion they have of a
man’s felicity, is by the Greeks called Μακαρισμός, for which we have no
name in our tongue. And thus much is sufficient for the present purpose,
to have been said of the PASSIONS.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER VII.

               OF THE ENDS, OR RESOLUTIONS OF DISCOURSE.


Of all _discourse_, governed by desire of knowledge, there is at last an
_end_, either by attaining, or by giving over. And in the chain of
discourse, wheresoever it be interrupted, there is an end for that time.

If the discourse be merely mental, it consisteth of thoughts that the
thing will be, and will not be; or that it has been, and has not been,
alternately. So that wheresoever you break off the chain of a man’s
discourse, you leave him in a presumption of _it will be_, or, _it will
not be_; or, _it has been_, or, _has not been_. All which is _opinion_.
And that which is alternate appetite, in deliberating concerning good
and evil; the same is alternate opinion, in the enquiry of the truth of
_past_, and _future_. [Sidenote: Judgment, or sentence final.] And as
the last appetite in deliberation, is called the _will_; so the last
opinion in search of the truth of past, and future, is called the
JUDGMENT, or _resolute_ and _final sentence_ of him that _discourseth_.
And as the whole chain of appetites alternate, in the question of good,
or bad, is called _deliberation_; [Sidenote: Doubt.] so the whole chain
of opinions alternate, in the question of true, or false, is called
DOUBT.

No discourse whatsoever, can end in absolute knowledge of fact, past, or
to come. For, as for the knowledge of fact, it is originally, sense; and
ever after, memory. And for the knowledge of consequence, which I have
said before is called science, it is not absolute, but conditional. No
man can know by discourse, that this, or that, is, has been, or will be;
which is to know absolutely: but only, that if this be, that is; if this
has been, that has been; if this shall be, that shall be: which is to
know conditionally; and that not the consequence of one thing to
another; but of one name of a thing, to another name of the same thing.

[Sidenote: Science.]

And therefore, when the discourse is put into speech, and begins with
the definitions of words, and proceeds by connexion of the same into
general affirmations, and of these again into syllogisms; the end or
last sum is called the conclusion; and the thought of the mind by it
signified, is that conditional knowledge, or knowledge of the
consequence of words, which is commonly called SCIENCE. [Sidenote:
Opinion.] But if the first ground of such discourse, be not definitions;
or if the definitions be not rightly joined together into syllogisms,
then the end or conclusion, is again OPINION, namely of the truth of
somewhat said, though sometimes in absurd and senseless words, without
possibility of being understood. [Sidenote: Conscious.] When two, or
more men, know of one and the same fact, they are said to be CONSCIOUS
of it one to another; which is as much as to know it together. And
because such are fittest witnesses of the facts of one another, or of a
third; it was, and ever will be reputed a very evil act, for any man to
speak against his _conscience_: or to corrupt or force another so to do:
insomuch that the plea of conscience, has been always hearkened unto
very diligently in all times. Afterwards, men made use of the same word
metaphorically, for the knowledge of their own secret facts, and secret
thoughts; and therefore it is rhetorically said, that the conscience is
a thousand witnesses. And last of all, men, vehemently in love with
their own new opinions, though never so absurd, and obstinately bent to
maintain them, gave those their opinions also that reverenced name of
conscience, as if they would have it seem unlawful, to change or speak
against them; and so pretend to know they are true, when they know at
most, but that they think so.

When a man’s discourse beginneth not at definitions, it beginneth either
at some other contemplation of his own, and then it is still called
opinion; or it beginneth at some saying of another, of whose ability to
know the truth, and of whose honesty in not deceiving, he doubteth not;
and then the discourse is not so much concerning the thing, as the
person; [Sidenote: Belief. Faith.] and the resolution is called BELIEF,
and FAITH: _faith_, _in_ the man; _belief_, both _of_ the man, and _of_
the truth of what he says. So that in belief are two opinions; one of
the saying of the man; the other of his virtue. To _have faith in_, or
_trust to_, or _believe a man_, signify the same thing; namely, an
opinion of the veracity of the man: but to _believe what is said_,
signifieth only an opinion of the truth of the saying. But we are to
observe that this phrase, _I believe in_; as also the Latin, _credo in_;
and the Greek, πιστέυω ἐις, are never used but in the writings of
divines. Instead of them, in other writings are put, _I believe him_; _I
trust him_; _I have faith in him_; _I rely on him_: and in Latin, _credo
illi_: _fido illi_: and in Greek, πιστέυω αὐτω: and that this
singularity of the ecclesiastic use of the word hath raised many
disputes about the right object of the Christian faith.

But by _believing in_, as it is in the creed, is meant, not trust in the
person; but confession and acknowledgment of the doctrine. For not only
Christians, but all manner of men do so believe in God, as to hold all
for truth they hear him say, whether they understand it, or not; which
is all the faith and trust can possibly be had in any person whatsoever:
but they do not all believe the doctrine of the creed.

From whence we may infer, that when we believe any saying whatsoever it
be, to be true, from arguments taken, not from the thing itself, or from
the principles of natural reason, but from the authority, and good
opinion we have, of him that hath said it; then is the speaker, or
person we believe in, or trust in, and whose word we take, the object of
our faith; and the honour done in believing, is done to him only. And
consequently, when we believe that the Scriptures are the word of God,
having no immediate revelation from God himself, our belief, faith, and
trust is in the church; whose word we take, and acquiesce therein. And
they that believe that which a prophet relates unto them in the name of
God, take the word of the prophet, do honour to him, and in him trust,
and believe, touching the truth of what he relateth, whether he be a
true, or a false prophet. And so it is also with all other history. For
if I should not believe all that is written by historians, of the
glorious acts of _Alexander_, or _Cæsar_; I do not think the ghost of
_Alexander_, or _Cæsar_, had any just cause to be offended; or any body
else, but the historian. If _Livy_ say the Gods made once a cow speak,
and we believe it not; we distrust not God therein, but _Livy_. So that
it is evident, that whatsoever we believe, upon no other reason, than
what is drawn from authority of men only, and their writings; whether
they be sent from God or not, is faith in men only.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER VIII.

              OF THE VIRTUES COMMONLY CALLED INTELLECTUAL;
                      AND THEIR CONTRARY DEFECTS.


[Sidenote: Intellectual virtue defined.]

VIRTUE generally, in all sorts of subjects, is somewhat that is valued
for eminence; and consisteth in comparison. For if all things were equal
in all men, nothing would be prized. And by _virtues intellectual_, are
always understood such abilities of the mind, as men praise, value, and
desire should be in themselves; and go commonly under the name of a
_good wit_; though the same word _wit_, be used also, to distinguish one
certain ability from the rest.

[Sidenote: Wit, natural, or acquired.]

These _virtues_ are of two sorts; _natural_, and _acquired_. By natural,
I mean not, that which a man hath from his birth: for that is nothing
else but sense; wherein men differ so little one from another, and from
brute beasts, as it is not to be reckoned amongst virtues. [Sidenote:
Natural wit.] But I mean, that _wit_, which is gotten by use only, and
experience; without method, culture, or instruction. This NATURAL WIT,
consisteth principally in two things; _celerity of imagining_, that is,
swift succession of one thought to another; and _steady direction_ to
some approved end. On the contrary a slow imagination, maketh that
defect, or fault of the mind, which is commonly called DULLNESS,
_stupidity_, and sometimes by other names that signify slowness of
motion, or difficulty to be moved.

[Sidenote: Good wit, or fancy.]

And this difference of quickness, is caused by the difference of men’s
passions; that love and dislike, some one thing, some another: and
therefore some men’s thoughts run one way, some another; and are held
to, and observe differently the things that pass through their
imagination. And whereas in this succession of men’s thoughts, there is
nothing to observe in the things they think on, but either in what they
be _like one another_, or in what they be _unlike_, or _what they serve
for_, or _how they serve to such a purpose_; those that observe their
similitudes, in case they be such as are but rarely observed by others,
are said to have a _good wit_; by which, in this occasion, is meant a
_good fancy_. But they that observe their differences, and
dissimilitudes; which is called _distinguishing_, and _discerning_,
[Sidenote: Good judgment.] and _judging_ between thing and thing; in
case, such discerning be not easy, are said to have a _good judgment_:
and particularly in matter of conversation and business; wherein, times,
places, and persons are to be discerned, [Sidenote: Discretion.] this
virtue is called DISCRETION. The former, that is, fancy, without the
help of judgment, is not commended as a virtue: but the latter which is
judgment, and discretion, is commended for itself, without the help of
fancy. Besides the discretion of times, places, and persons, necessary
to a good fancy, there is required also an often application of his
thoughts to their end; that is to say, to some use to be made of them.
This done; he that hath this virtue, will be easily fitted with
similitudes, that will please, not only by illustrations of his
discourse, and adorning it with new and apt metaphors; but also, by the
rarity of their invention. But without steadiness, and direction to some
end, a great fancy is one kind of madness; such as they have, that
entering into any discourse, are snatched from their purpose, by every
thing that comes in their thought, into so many, and so long
digressions, and parentheses, that they utterly lose themselves: which
kind of folly, I know no particular name for: but the cause of it is,
sometimes want of experience; whereby that seemeth to a man new and
rare, which doth not so to others: sometimes pusillanimity; by which
that seems great to him, which other men think a trifle: and whatsoever
is new, or great, and therefore thought fit to be told, withdraws a man
by degrees from the intended way of his discourse.

In a good poem, whether it be _epic_, or _dramatic_; as also in
_sonnets_, _epigrams_, and other pieces, both judgment and fancy are
required: but the fancy must be more eminent; because they please for
the extravagancy; but ought not to displease by indiscretion.

In a good history, the judgment must be eminent; because the goodness
consisteth, in the method, in the truth, and in the choice of the
actions that are most profitable to be known. Fancy has no place, but
only in adorning the style.

In orations of praise, and in invectives, the fancy is predominant;
because the design is not truth, but to honour or dishonour; which is
done by noble, or by vile comparisons. The judgment does but suggest
what circumstances make an action laudable, or culpable.

In hortatives, and pleadings, as truth, or disguise serveth best to the
design in hand; so is the judgment, or the fancy most required.

[Sidenote: Discretion.]

In demonstration, in counsel, and all rigorous search of truth, judgment
does all, except sometimes the understanding have need to be opened by
some apt similitude; and then there is so much use of fancy. But for
metaphors, they are in this case utterly excluded. For seeing they
openly profess deceit; to admit them into counsel, or reasoning, were
manifest folly.

And in any discourse whatsoever, if the defect of discretion be
apparent, how extravagant soever the fancy be, the whole discourse will
be taken for a sign of want of wit; and so will it never when the
discretion is manifest, though the fancy be never so ordinary.

The secret thoughts of a man run over all things, holy, profane, clean,
obscene, grave, and light, without shame, or blame; which verbal
discourse cannot do, farther than the judgment shall approve of the
time, place, and persons. An anatomist, or a physician may speak, or
write his judgment of unclean things; because it is not to please, but
profit: but for another man to write his extravagant, and pleasant
fancies of the same, is as if a man, from being tumbled into the dirt,
should come and present himself before good company. And it is the want
of discretion that makes the difference. Again, in professed remissness
of mind, and familiar company, a man may play with the sounds, and
equivocal significations of words; and that many times with encounters
of extraordinary fancy: but in a sermon, or in public, or before persons
unknown, or whom we ought to reverence; there is no gingling of words
that will not be accounted folly: and the difference is only in the want
of discretion. So that where wit is wanting, it is not fancy that is
wanting, but discretion. Judgment therefore without fancy is wit, but
fancy without judgment, not.

[Sidenote: Prudence.]

When the thoughts of a man, that has a design in hand, running over a
multitude of things, observes how they conduce to that design; or what
design they may conduce unto; if his observations be such as are not
easy, or usual, this wit of his is called PRUDENCE; and depends on much
experience, and memory of the like things, and their consequences
heretofore. In which there is not so much difference of men; as there is
in their fancies and judgment; because the experience of men equal in
age, is not much unequal, as to the quantity; but lies in different
occasions; every one having his private designs. To govern well a
family, and a kingdom, are not different degrees of prudence; but
different sorts of business; no more than to draw a picture in little,
or as great, or greater than the life, are different degrees of art. A
plain husbandman is more prudent in affairs of his own house, than a
privy-councillor in the affairs of another man.

[Sidenote: Craft.]

To prudence, if you add the use of unjust, or dishonest means, such as
usually are prompted to men by fear, or want; you have that crooked
wisdom, which is called CRAFT; which is a sign of pusillanimity. For
magnanimity is contempt of unjust, or dishonest helps. And that which
the Latins call _versutia_, translated into English, _shifting_, and is
a putting off of a present danger or incommodity, by engaging into a
greater, as when a man robs one to pay another, is but a shorter-sighted
craft, called _versutia_, from _versura_, which signifies taking money
at usury for the present payment of interest.

[Sidenote: Acquired wit.]

As for _acquired wit_, I mean acquired by method and instruction, there
is none but reason; which is grounded on the right use of speech, and
produceth the sciences. But of reason and science I have already spoken,
in the fifth and sixth chapters.

The causes of this difference of wits, are in the passions; and the
difference of passions proceedeth, partly from the different
constitution of the body, and partly from different education. For if
the difference proceeded from the temper of the brain, and the organs of
sense, either exterior or interior, there would be no less difference of
men in their sight, hearing, or other senses, than in their fancies and
discretions. It proceeds therefore from the passions; which are
different, not only from the difference of mens’ complexions; but also
from their difference of customs, and education.

The passions that most of all cause the difference of wit, are
principally, the more or less desire of power, of riches, of knowledge,
and of honour. All which may be reduced to the first, that is, desire of
power. For riches, knowledge, and honour, are but several sorts of
power.

And therefore, a man who has no great passion for any of these things;
but is, as men term it, indifferent; though he may be so far a good man,
as to be free from giving offence; yet he cannot possibly have either a
great fancy, or much judgment. For the thoughts are to the desires, as
scouts, and spies, to range abroad, and find the way to the things
desired: all steadiness of the mind’s motion, and all quickness of the
same, proceeding from thence: for as to have no desire, is to be dead:
[Sidenote: Giddiness.] so to have weak passions, is dullness; and to
have passions indifferently for everything, GIDDINESS, and
_distraction_; [Sidenote: Madness.] and to have stronger and more
vehement passions for anything, than is ordinarily seen in others, is
that which men call MADNESS.

Whereof there be almost as many kinds, as of the passions themselves.
Sometimes the extraordinary and extravagant passion, proceedeth from the
evil constitution of the organs of the body, or harm done them; and
sometimes the hurt, and indisposition of the organs, is caused by the
vehemence, or long continuance of the passion. But in both cases the
madness is of one and the same nature.

The passion, whose violence, or continuance, maketh madness, is either
great _vain-glory_; which is commonly called _pride_, and
_self-conceit_; or great _dejection_ of mind.

[Sidenote: Rage.]

Pride, subjecteth a man to anger, the excess whereof, is the madness
called RAGE and FURY. And thus it comes to pass that excessive desire of
revenge, when it becomes habitual, hurteth the organs, and becomes rage:
that excessive love, with jealousy, becomes also rage: excessive opinion
of a man’s own self, for divine inspiration, for wisdom, learning, form
and the like, becomes distraction and giddiness: the same, joined with
envy, rage: vehement opinion of the truth of anything, contradicted by
others, rage.

[Sidenote: Melancholy.]

Dejection subjects a man to causeless fears; which is a madness,
commonly called MELANCHOLY; apparent also in divers manners as in
haunting of solitudes and graves; in superstitious behaviour; and in
fearing, some one, some another particular thing. In sum, all passions
that produce strange and unusual behaviour, are called by the general
name of madness. But of the several kinds of madness, he that would take
the pains, might enrol a legion. [Sidenote: Madness.] And if the
excesses be madness, there is no doubt but the passions themselves, when
they tend to evil, are degrees of the same.

For example, though the effect of folly, in them that are possessed of
an opinion of being inspired, be not visible always in one man, by any
very extravagant action, that proceedeth from such passion; yet, when
many of them conspire together, the rage of the whole multitude is
visible enough. For what argument of madness can there be greater, than
to clamour, strike, and throw stones at our best friends? Yet this is
somewhat less than such a multitude will do. For they will clamour,
fight against, and destroy those, by whom all their lifetime before,
they have been protected, and secured from injury. And if this be
madness in the multitude, it is the same in every particular man. For as
in the midst of the sea, though a man perceive no sound of that part of
the water next him, yet he is well assured, that part contributes as
much to the roaring of the sea, as any other part of the same quantity;
so also, though we perceive no great unquietness in one or two men, yet
we may be well assured, that their singular passions, are parts of the
seditious roaring of a troubled nation. And if there were nothing else
that bewrayed their madness; yet that very arrogating such inspiration
to themselves, is argument enough. If some man in Bedlam should
entertain you with sober discourse; and you desire in taking leave, to
know what he were, that you might another time requite his civility; and
he should tell you, he were God the Father; I think you need expect no
extravagant action for argument of his madness.

This opinion of inspiration, called commonly, private spirit, begins
very often, from some lucky finding of an error generally held by
others; and not knowing, or not remembering, by what conduct of reason,
they came to so singular a truth, (as they think it, though it be many
times an untruth they light on) they presently admire themselves, as
being in the special grace of God Almighty, who hath revealed the same
to them supernaturally, by his Spirit.

Again, that madness is nothing else, but too much appearing passion, may
be gathered out of the effects of wine, which are the same with those of
the evil disposition of the organs. For the variety of behaviour in men
that have drunk too much, is the same with that of madmen: some of them
raging, others loving, others laughing, all extravagantly, but according
to their several domineering passions: for the effect of the wine, does
but remove dissimulation, and take from them the sight of the deformity
of their passions. For, I believe, the most sober men, when they walk
alone without care and employment of the mind, would be unwilling the
vanity and extravagance of their thoughts at that time should be
publicly seen; which is a confession, that passions unguided, are for
the most part mere madness.

The opinions of the world, both in ancient and later ages, concerning
the cause of madness, have been two. Some deriving them from the
passions; some, from demons, or spirits, either good or bad, which they
thought might enter into a man, possess him, and move his organs in such
strange and uncouth manner, as madmen use to do. The former sort
therefore, called such men, madmen: but the latter, called them
sometimes _demoniacs_, that is, possessed with spirits; sometimes
_enurgumeni_, that is, agitated or moved with spirits; and now in Italy
they are called, not only _pazzi_, madmen; but also _spiritati_, men
possessed.

There was once a great conflux of people in Abdera, a city of the
Greeks, at the acting of the tragedy of _Andromeda_, upon an extreme hot
day; whereupon, a great many of the spectators falling into fevers, had
this accident from the heat, and from the tragedy together, that they
did nothing but pronounce iambics, with the names of Perseus and
Andromeda; which, together with the fever, was cured by the coming on of
winter; and this madness was thought to proceed from the passion
imprinted by the tragedy. Likewise there reigned a fit of madness in
another Grecian city, which seized only the young maidens; and caused
many of them to hang themselves. This was by most then thought an act of
the Devil. But one that suspected, that contempt of life in them, might
proceed from some passion of the mind, and supposing that they did not
contemn also their honour, gave counsel to the magistrates, to strip
such as so hanged themselves, and let them hang out naked. This, the
story says, cured that madness. But on the other side, the same
Grecians, did often ascribe madness to the operation of Eumenides, or
Furies; and sometimes of Ceres, Phœbus, and other gods; so much did men
attribute to phantasms, as to think them aëreal living bodies; and
generally to call them spirits. And as the Romans in this, held the same
opinion with the Greeks, so also did the Jews; for they called madmen
prophets, or, according as they thought the spirits good or bad,
demoniacs: and some of them called both prophets and demoniacs, madmen;
and some called the same man both demoniac, and madman. But for the
Gentiles it is no wonder, because diseases and health, vices and
virtues, and many natural accidents, were with them termed, and
worshipped as demons. So that a man was to understand by demon, as well,
sometimes an ague, as a devil. But for the Jews to have such opinion, is
somewhat strange. For neither Moses nor Abraham pretended to prophecy by
possession of a spirit; but from the voice of God; or by a vision or
dream: nor is there anything in his law, moral or ceremonial, by which
they were taught, there was any such enthusiasm, or any possession. When
God is said, (_Numb._ xi. 25) to take from the spirit that was in Moses,
and give to the seventy elders, the Spirit of God (taking it for the
substance of God) is not divided. The Scriptures, by the Spirit of God
in man, mean a man’s spirit, inclined to godliness. And where it is
said, (_Exod._ xxiii. 8) “whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom
to make garments for Aaron,” is not meant a spirit put into them, that
can make garments, but the wisdom of their own spirits in that kind of
work. In the like sense, the spirit of man, when it produceth unclean
actions, is ordinarily called an unclean spirit, and so other spirits,
though not always, yet as often as the virtue or vice so styled, is
extraordinary, and eminent. Neither did the other prophets of the old
Testament pretend enthusiasm; or, that God spake in them; but to them,
by voice, vision, or dream; and the _burthen of the Lord_ was not
possession, but command. How then could the Jews fall into this opinion
of possession? I can imagine no reason, but that which is common to all
men; namely, the want of curiosity to search natural causes: and their
placing felicity in the acquisition of the gross pleasures of the
senses, and the things that most immediately conduce thereto. For they
that see any strange, and unusual ability, or defect, in a man’s mind;
unless they see withal, from what cause it may probably proceed, can
hardly think it natural; and if not natural, they must needs think it
supernatural; and then what can it be, but that either God or the Devil
is in him? And hence it came to pass, when our Saviour (_Mark_ iii. 21)
was compassed about with the multitude, those of the house doubted he
was mad, and went out to hold him: but the Scribes said he had
Beelzebub, and that was it, by which he cast out devils; as if the
greater madman had awed the lesser: and that (_John_ x. 20) some said,
_he hath a devil, and is mad_; whereas others holding him for a prophet,
said, _these are not the words of one that hath a devil_. So in the old
Testament he that came to anoint Jehu, (_2 Kings_ ix. 11) was a prophet;
but some of the company asked Jehu, _what came that madman for?_ So that
in sum, it is manifest, that whosoever behaved himself in extraordinary
manner, was thought by the Jews to be possessed either with a good, or
evil spirit; except by the Sadducees, who erred so far on the other
hand, as not to believe there were at all any spirits, which is very
near to direct atheism; and thereby perhaps the more provoked others, to
term such men demoniacs, rather than madmen.

But why then does our Saviour proceed in the curing of them, as if they
were possessed; and not as if they were mad? To which I can give no
other kind of answer, but that which is given to those that urge the
Scripture in like manner against the opinion of the motion of the earth.
The Scripture was written to shew unto men the kingdom of God, and to
prepare their minds to become his obedient subjects; leaving the world,
and the philosophy thereof, to the disputation of men, for the
exercising of their natural reason. Whether the earth’s, or sun’s motion
make the day, and night; or whether the exorbitant actions of men,
proceed from passion, or from the devil, so we worship him not, it is
all one, as to our obedience, and subjection to God Almighty; which is
the thing for which the Scripture was written. As for that our Saviour
speaketh to the disease, as to a person; it is the usual phrase of all
that cure by words only, as Christ did, and enchanters pretend to do,
whether they speak to a devil or not. For is not Christ also said
(_Matt._ viii. 26) to have rebuked the winds? Is not he said also
(_Luke_ iv. 39) to rebuke a fever? Yet this does not argue that a fever
is a devil. And whereas many of the devils are said to confess Christ;
it is not necessary to interpret those places otherwise, than that those
madmen confessed him. And whereas our Saviour (_Matt._ xii. 43) speaketh
of an unclean spirit, that having gone out of a man, wandereth through
dry places, seeking rest, and finding none, and returning into the same
man, with seven other spirits worse than himself; it is manifestly a
parable, alluding to a man, that after a little endeavour to quit his
lusts, is vanquished by the strength of them; and becomes seven times
worse than he was. So that I see nothing at all in the Scripture, that
requireth a belief, that demoniacs were any other thing but madmen.

[Sidenote: Insignificant speech.]

There is yet another fault in the discourses of some men; which may also
be numbered amongst the sorts of madness; namely, that abuse of words,
whereof I have spoken before in the fifth chapter, by the name of
absurdity. And that is, when men speak such words, as put together, have
in them no signification at all; but are fallen upon by some, through
misunderstanding of the words they have received, and repeat by rote; by
others from intention to deceive by obscurity. And this is incident to
none but those, that converse in questions of matters incomprehensible,
as the School-men; or in questions of abstruse philosophy. The common
sort of men seldom speak insignificantly, and are therefore, by those
other egregious persons counted idiots. But to be assured their words
are without any thing correspondent to them in the mind, there would
need some examples; which if any man require, let him take a School-man
in his hands and see if he can translate any one chapter concerning any
difficult point, as the Trinity; the Deity; the nature of Christ;
transubstantiation; free-will, &c. into any of the modern tongues, so as
to make the same intelligible; or into any tolerable Latin, such as they
were acquainted withal, that lived when the Latin tongue was vulgar.
What is the meaning of these words, _The first cause does not
necessarily inflow any thing into the second, by force of the essential
subordination of the second causes, by which it may help it to work_?
They are the translation of the title of the sixth chapter of _Suarez’_
first book, _Of the concourse, motion, and help of God_. When men write
whole volumes of such stuff, are they not mad, or intend to make others
so? And particularly, in the question of transubstantiation; where after
certain words spoken; they that say, the white_ness_, round_ness_,
magni_tude_, quali_ty_, corruptibili_ty_, all which are incorporeal, &c.
go out of the wafer, into the body of our blessed Saviour, do they not
make those _nesses_, _tudes_, and _ties_, to be so many spirits
possessing his body? For by spirits, they mean always things, that being
incorporeal, are nevertheless moveable from one place to another. So
that this kind of absurdity, may rightly be numbered amongst the many
sorts of madness; and all the time that guided by clear thoughts of
their worldly lust, they forbear disputing, or writing thus, but lucid
intervals. And thus much of the virtues and defects intellectual.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER IX.

                 OF THE SEVERAL SUBJECTS OF KNOWLEDGE.


[Sidenote: Knowledge.]

There are of KNOWLEDGE two kinds; whereof one is _knowledge of fact_:
the other _knowledge of the consequence of one affirmation to another_.
The former is nothing else, but sense and memory, and is _absolute
knowledge_; as when we see a fact doing, or remember it done: and this
is the knowledge required in a witness. The latter is called _science_;
and is _conditional_; as when we know, that, _if the figure shown be a
circle, then any straight line through the centre shall divide it into
two equal parts_. And this is the knowledge required in a philosopher;
that is to say, of him that pretends to reasoning.

The register of _knowledge of fact_ is called _history_. Whereof there
be two sorts: one called _natural history_; which is the history of such
facts, or effects of nature, as have no dependence on man’s _will_; such
as are the histories of _metals_, _plants_, _animals_, _regions_, and
the like. The other, is _civil history_; which is the history of the
voluntary actions of men in commonwealths.

The registers of science, are such _books_ as contain the
_demonstrations_ of consequences of one affirmation, to another; and are
commonly called _books of philosophy_; whereof the sorts are many,
according to the diversity of the matter; and may be divided in such
manner as I have divided them in the following table.

                              { Consequences from the accidents
                              { common to all bodies natural;
                              { which are _quantity_, and _motion_.
                              {
               { Consequences {              { Consequences from the
               { from the     {              { qualities of bodies
               { accidents    {              { _transient_, such as
               { of bodies    {              { sometimes appear,
               { natural;     {              { sometimes vanish,
               { which is     {              { _Meteorology_.
               { called       {              {
               { NATURAL      {              {              { Consequences
               { PHILOSOPHY.  { Physics or   {              { from the
               {              { consequences {              { qualities of
               {              { from         {              { the _stars_.
               {              { _qualities_. {              {
               {                             {              { Consequences
               {                             {              { of the
               {                             {              { qualities
               {                             {              { from
               {                             {              { _liquid_
 SCIENCE,      {                             { Consequences { bodies,
 that is,      {                             { from the     { that fill
 knowledge of  {                             { qualities of { the space
 consequences; {                             { bodies       { between the
 which is      {                             { _permanent_. { stars; such
 called also   {                                            { as are the
 PHILOSOPHY.   {                                            { _air_, or
               {                                            { substances
               {                                            { ethereal.
               {                                            {
               {                                            { Consequences
               {                                            { from the
               {                                            { qualities of
               {                                            { _bodies
               {                                            { terrestrial_.
               { Consequences {
               { from the     { 1. Of consequences from the _institution_
               { accidents of { of COMMONWEALTHS, to the _rights_, and
               { _politic_    { _duties_ of the _body politic_ or
               { bodies;      { _sovereign_.
               { which is     {
               { called       {
               { POLITICS,    { 2. Of consequences from the same, to the
               { and CIVIL    { _duty_ and _right_ of the _subjects_.
               { PHILOSOPHY.  {

 Consequences from quantity, and motion _indeterminate_;        { PHILOSOPHIA
 which being the principles or first foundation of              { PRIMA.
 philosophy, is called _Philosophia Prima_.                     {

               { Consequences   { By Figure.   }                { GEOMETRY.
               { from quanti-   {              } _Mathematics._ {
               { ty and motion  {              }                {
 Consequences  { determined.    { By Number.   }                { ARITHMETIC.
 from motion   {
 and quantity  {                { Consequences }
 _determined_. { Consequences   { from the     }
               { from the       { motion and   }
               { motion, and    { quantity of  }                { ASTRONOMY.
               { quantity of    { the greater  } _Cosmography._ {
               { bodies in      { parts of the }                { GEOGRAPHY.
               { _special_.     { world, as    }
                                { the _earth_  }
                                { and _stars_. }
                                {
                                { Consequences }
                                { from the     }                { _Science_ of
                                { motions of   } _Mechanics._   { ENGINEERS.
                                { special      } Doctrine of    {
                                { kinds, and   } _weight_.      { ARCHITECTURE.
                                { figures of   }                { NAVIGATION.
                                { body.        }
                                                                  METEOROLOGY.

 { Consequences from the _light_ of the stars. Out of             } SCIOGRAPHY.
 { this, and the motion of the sun, is made the science of        }
 {
 { Consequences from the _influences_ of the stars                } ASTROLOGY.

 { Consequences { Consequences from the qualities of
 { from the     { _minerals_, as _stones_, _metals_, &c.
 { parts of the {
 { earth, that  {
 { are _without {
 { sense_.      { Consequences from the qualities of
 {              { _vegetables_.
 {
 {              { Consequences { Consequences from _vision_         OPTICS.
 {              { from the     { Consequences from _sounds_         MUSIC.
 {              { qualities of {
 {              { _animals     { Consequences from the rest
 { Consequences { in general_. { of the _senses._
 { from the     {
 { qualities of {              { Consequences from the            { ETHICS.
 { _animals_.   {              { _passions_ of men                {
                {              {
                {              {              { In _magnifying_,  } POETRY.
                { Consequences {              { _vilifying_, &c.  }
                { from the     { Consequences { In _persuading_,    RHETORIC.
                { qualities of { from         { In _reasoning_,     LOGIC.
                { _men in      { _speech_.    { In _contracting_,   The _Science_
                  special_.    {                                    of JUST and
                               {                                    UNJUST.


                                -------


                               CHAPTER X.

                 OF POWER, WORTH, DIGNITY, HONOUR, AND
                              WORTHINESS.


[Sidenote: Power.]

The POWER _of a man_, to take it universally, is his present means; to
obtain some future apparent good; and is either _original_ or
_instrumental_.

_Natural power_, is the eminence of the faculties of body, or mind: as
extraordinary strength, form, prudence, arts, eloquence, liberality,
nobility. _Instrumental_ are those powers, which acquired by these, or
by fortune, are means and instruments to acquire more: as riches,
reputation, friends, and the secret working of God, which men call good
luck. For the nature of power, is in this point, like to fame,
increasing as it proceeds; or like the motion of heavy bodies, which the
further they go, make still the more haste.

The greatest of human powers, is that which is compounded of the powers
of most men, united by consent, in one person, natural, or civil, that
has the use of all their powers depending on his will; such as is the
power of a common-wealth: or depending on the wills of each particular;
such as is the power of a faction or of divers factions leagued.
Therefore to have servants, is power; to have friends, is power: for
they are strengths united.

Also riches joined with liberality, is power; because it procureth
friends, and servants: without liberality, not so; because in this case
they defend not; but expose men to envy, as a prey.

Reputation of power, is power; because it draweth with it the adherence
of those that need protection.

So is reputation of love of a man’s country, called popularity, for the
same reason.

Also, what quality soever maketh a man beloved, or feared of many; or
the reputation of such quality, is power; because it is a means to have
the assistance, and service of many.

Good success is power; because it maketh reputation of wisdom, or good
fortune; which makes men either fear him, or rely on him.

Affability of men already in power, is increase of power; because it
gaineth love.

Reputation of prudence in the conduct of peace or war, is power; because
to prudent men, we commit the government of ourselves, more willingly
than to others.

Nobility is power, not in all places, but only in those commonwealths,
where it has privileges: for in such privileges, consisteth their power.

Eloquence is power, because it is seeming prudence.

Form is power; because being a promise of good, it recommendeth men to
the favour of women and strangers.

The sciences, are small power; because not eminent; and therefore, not
acknowledged in any man; nor are at all, but in a few, and in them, but
of a few things. For science is of that nature, as none can understand
it to be, but such as in a good measure have attained it.

Arts of public use, as fortification, making of engines, and other
instruments of war; because they confer to defence, and victory, are
power: and though the true mother of them, be science, namely the
mathematics; yet, because they are brought into the light, by the hand
of the artificer, they be esteemed, the midwife passing with the vulgar
for the mother, as his issue.

[Sidenote: Worth.]

The _value_, or WORTH of a man, is as of all other things, his price;
that is to say, so much as would be given for the use of his power: and
therefore is not absolute; but a thing dependant on the need and
judgment of another. An able conductor of soldiers, is of great price in
time of war present, or imminent; but in peace not so. A learned and
uncorrupt judge, is much worth in time of peace; but not so much in war.
And as in other things, so in men, not the seller, but the buyer
determines the price. For let a man, as most men do, rate themselves at
the highest value they can; yet their true value is no more than it is
esteemed by others.

The manifestation of the value we set on one another, is that which is
commonly called honouring, and dishonouring. To value a man at a high
rate, is to _honour_ him; at a low rate, is to _dishonour_ him. But
high, and low, in this case, is to be understood by comparison to the
rate that each man setteth on himself.

[Sidenote: Dignity.]

The public worth of a man, which is the value set on him by the
commonwealth, is that which men commonly call DIGNITY. And this value of
him by the commonwealth, is understood, by offices of command,
judicature, public employment; or by names and titles, introduced for
distinction of such value.

To pray to another, for aid of any kind, is _to_ HONOUR; because a sign
we have an opinion he has power to help; and the more difficult the aid
is, the more is the honour.

[Sidenote: To honour and dishonour.]

To obey, is to honour, because no man obeys them, whom they think have
no power to help, or hurt them. And consequently to disobey, is to
_dishonour_.

To give great gifts to a man, is to honour him; because it is buying of
protection, and acknowledging of power. To give little gifts, is to
dishonour; because it is but alms, and signifies an opinion of the need
of small helps.

To be sedulous in promoting another’s good; also to flatter, is to
honour; as a sign we seek his protection or aid. To neglect, is to
dishonour.

To give way, or place to another, in any commodity, is to honour; being
a confession of greater power. To arrogate, is to dishonour.

To show any sign of love, or fear of another, is to honour; for both to
love, and to fear, is to value. To contemn, or less to love or fear,
than he expects, is to dishonour; for it is undervaluing.

To praise, magnify, or call happy, is to honour; because nothing but
goodness, power, and felicity is valued. To revile, mock, or pity, is to
dishonour.

To speak to another with consideration, to appear before him with
decency, and humility, is to honour him; as signs of fear to offend. To
speak to him rashly, to do any thing before him obscenely, slovenly,
impudently, is to dishonour.

To believe, to trust, to rely on another, is to honour him; sign of
opinion of his virtue and power. To distrust, or not believe, is to
dishonour.

To hearken to a man’s counsel, or discourse of what kind soever is to
honour; as a sign we think him wise, or eloquent, or witty. To sleep, or
go forth, or talk the while, is to dishonour.

To do those things to another, which he takes for signs of honour, or
which the law or custom makes so, is to honour; because in approving the
honour done by others, he acknowledgeth the power which others
acknowledge. To refuse to do them, is to dishonour.

To agree with in opinion, is to honour; as being a sign of approving his
judgment, and wisdom. To dissent, is dishonour, and an upbraiding of
error; and, if the dissent be in many things, of folly.

To imitate, is to honour; for it is vehemently to approve. To imitate
one’s enemy, is to dishonour.

To honour those another honours, is to honour him; as a sign of
approbation of his judgment. To honour his enemies, is to dishonour him.

To employ in counsel, or in actions of difficulty, is to honour; as a
sign of opinion of his wisdom, or other power. To deny employment in the
same cases, to those that seek it, is to dishonour.

All these ways of honouring, are natural; and as well within, as without
commonwealths. But in commonwealths, where he, or they that have the
supreme authority, can make whatsoever they please, to stand for signs
of honour, there be other honours.

A sovereign doth honour a subject, with whatsoever title, or office, or
employment, or action, that he himself will have taken for a sign of his
will to honour him.

The king of Persia, honoured Mordecai, when he appointed he should be
conducted through the streets in the king’s garment, upon one of the
king’s horses, with a crown on his head, and a prince before him,
proclaiming, _thus shall it be done to him that the king will honour_.
And yet another king of Persia, or the same another time, to one that
demanded for some great service, to wear one of the king’s robes, gave
him leave so to do; but with this addition, that he should wear it as
the king’s fool; and then it was dishonour. So that of civil honour, the
fountain is in the person of the commonwealth, and dependeth on the will
of the sovereign; and is therefore temporary, and called _civil honour_;
such as magistracy, offices, titles; and in some places coats and
scutcheons painted: and men honour such as have them, as having so many
signs of favour in the commonwealth; which favour is power.

[Sidenote: Honourable.]

_Honourable_ is whatsoever possession, action, or quality, is an
argument and sign of power.

[Sidenote: Dishonourable.]

And therefore to be honoured, loved, or feared of many, is honourable;
as arguments of power. To be honoured of few or none, _dishonourable_.

Dominion, and victory is honourable; because acquired by power; and
servitude, for need, or fear, is dishonourable.

Good fortune, if lasting, honourable; as a sign of the favour of God.
Ill fortune, and losses, dishonourable. Riches, are honourable; for they
are power. Poverty, dishonourable. Magnanimity, liberality, hope,
courage, confidence, are honourable; for they proceed from the
conscience of power. Pusillanimity, parsimony, fear, diffidence, are
dishonourable.

Timely resolution, or determination of what a man is to do, is
honourable; as being the contempt of small difficulties, and dangers.
And irresolution, dishonourable; as a sign of too much valuing of little
impediments, and little advantages: for when a man has weighed things as
long as the time permits, and resolves not, the difference of weight is
but little; and therefore if he resolve not, he overvalues little
things, which is pusillanimity.

[Sidenote: Honourable & Dishonourable.]

All actions, and speeches, that proceed, or seem to proceed, from much
experience, science, discretion, or wit, are honourable; for all these
are powers. Actions, or words that proceed from error, ignorance, or
folly, dishonourable.

Gravity, as far forth as it seems to proceed from a mind employed on
something else, is honourable; because employment is a sign of power.
But if it seem to proceed from a purpose to appear grave, it is
dishonourable. For the gravity of the former, is like the steadiness of
a ship laden with merchandize; but of the latter, like the steadiness of
a ship ballasted with sand, and other trash.

To be conspicuous, that is to say, to be known, for wealth, office,
great actions, or any eminent good, is honourable; as a sign of the
power for which he is conspicuous. On the contrary, obscurity, is
dishonourable.

To be descended from conspicuous parents, is honourable; because they
the more easily attain the aids, and friends of their ancestors. On the
contrary, to be descended from obscure parentage, is dishonourable.

Actions proceeding from equity, joined with loss, are honourable; as
signs of magnanimity: for magnanimity is a sign of power. On the
contrary, craft, shifting, neglect of equity, is dishonourable.

Covetousness of great riches, and ambition of great honours, are
honourable; as signs of power to obtain them. Covetousness, and
ambition, of little gains, or preferments, is dishonourable.

Nor does it alter the case of honour, whether an action, so it be great
and difficult, and consequently a sign of much power, be just or unjust:
for honour consisteth only in the opinion of power. Therefore the
ancient heathen did not think they dishonoured, but greatly honoured the
Gods, when they introduced them in their poems, committing rapes,
thefts, and other great, but unjust, or unclean acts: insomuch as
nothing is so much celebrated in Jupiter, as his adulteries; nor in
Mercury, as his frauds, and thefts: of whose praises, in a hymn of
Homer, the greatest is this, that being born in the morning, he had
invented music at noon, and before night, stolen away the cattle of
Apollo, from his herdsmen.

Also amongst men, till there were constituted great commonwealths, it
was thought no dishonour to be a pirate, or a highway thief; but rather
a lawful trade, not only amongst the Greeks, but also amongst all other
nations; as is manifest by the histories of ancient time. And at this
day, in this part of the world, private duels are, and always will be
honourable, though unlawful, till such time as there shall be honour
ordained for them that refuse, and ignominy for them that make the
challenge. For duels also are many times effects of courage; and the
ground of courage is always strength or skill, which are power; though
for the most part they be effects of rash speaking, and of the fear of
dishonour, in one, or both the combatants; who engaged by rashness, are
driven into the lists to avoid disgrace.

[Sidenote: Coats of arms.]

Scutcheons, and coats of arms hereditary, where they have any eminent
privileges, are honourable; otherwise not: for their power consisteth
either in such privileges, or in riches, or some such thing as is
equally honoured in other men. This kind of honour, commonly called
gentry, hath been derived from the ancient Germans. For there never was
any such thing known, where the German customs were unknown. Nor is it
now any where in use, where the Germans have not inhabited. The ancient
Greek commanders, when they went to war, had their shields painted with
such devices as they pleased; insomuch as an unpainted buckler was a
sign of poverty, and of a common soldier; but they transmitted not the
inheritance of them. The Romans transmitted the marks of their families:
but they were the images, not the devices of their ancestors. Amongst
the people of Asia, Africa, and America, there is not, nor was ever, any
such thing. The Germans only had that custom; from whom it has been
derived into England, France, Spain, and Italy, when in great numbers
they either aided the Romans, or made their own conquests in these
western parts of the world.

For Germany, being anciently, as all other countries, in their
beginnings, divided amongst an infinite number of little lords, or
masters of families, that continually had wars one with another; those
masters, or lords, principally to the end they might, when they were
covered with arms, be known by their followers; and partly for ornament,
both painted their armour, or their scutcheon, or coat, with the picture
of some beast, or other thing; and also put some eminent and visible
mark upon the crest of their helmets. And this ornament both of the
arms, and crest, descended by inheritance to their children; to the
eldest pure, and to the rest with some note of diversity, such as the
old master, that is to say in Dutch, the _Here-alt_ thought fit. But
when many such families, joined together, made a greater monarchy, this
duty of the Herealt, to distinguish scutcheons, was made a private
office apart. And the issue of these lords, is the great and ancient
gentry; which for the most part bear living creatures, noted for
courage, and rapine; or castles, battlements, belts, weapons, bars,
palisadoes, and other notes of war; nothing being then in honour, but
virtue military. Afterwards, not only kings, but popular commonwealths,
gave divers manners of scutcheons, to such as went forth to the war, or
returned from it, for encouragement, or recompense to their service. All
which, by an observing reader, may be found in such ancient histories,
Greek and Latin, as make mention of the German nation and manners, in
their times.

[Sidenote: Titles of honour.]

Titles of _honour_, such as are duke, count, marquis, and baron, are
honourable; as signifying the value set upon them by the sovereign power
of the commonwealth: which titles, were in old time titles of office,
and command, derived some from the Romans, some from the Germans and
French: dukes, in Latin _duces_, being generals in war: counts,
_comites_, such as bear the general company out of friendship, and were
left to govern and defend places conquered, and pacified: marquises,
_marchiones_, were counts that governed the marches, or bounds of the
empire. Which titles of duke, count, and marquis, came into the empire,
about the time of Constantine the Great, from the customs of the German
_militia_. But baron, seems to have been a title of the Gauls, and
signifies a great man; such as were the king’s, or prince’s men, whom
they employed in war about their persons; and seems to be derived from
_vir_, to _ber_, and _bar_, that signified the same in the language of
the Gauls, that _vir_ in Latin; and thence to _bero_, and _baro_: so
that such men were called _berones_, and after _barones_; and, in
Spanish, _varones_. But he that would know more particularly the
original of titles of honour, may find it, as I have done this, in Mr.
Selden’s most excellent treatise of that subject. In process of time
these offices of honour, by occasion of trouble, and for reasons of good
and peaceable government, were turned into mere titles; serving for the
most part, to distinguish the precedence, place, and order of subjects
in the commonwealth: and men were made dukes, counts, marquises, and
barons of places, wherein they had neither possession, nor command: and
other titles also, were devised to the same end.

[Sidenote: Worthiness.]

WORTHINESS, is a thing different from the worth, or value of a man; and
also from his merit, or desert, and consisteth in a particular power, or
ability for that, whereof he is said to be worthy: [Sidenote: Fitness.]
which particular ability, is usually named FITNESS, or _aptitude_.

For he is worthiest to be a commander, to be a judge, or to have any
other charge, that is best fitted, with the qualities required to the
well discharging of it; and worthiest of riches, that has the qualities
most requisite for the well using of them: any of which qualities being
absent, one may nevertheless be a worthy man, and valuable for something
else. Again, a man may be worthy of riches, office, and employment, that
nevertheless, can plead no right to have it before another; and
therefore cannot be said to merit or deserve it. For merit presupposeth
a right, and that the thing deserved is due by promise: of which I shall
say more hereafter, when I shall speak of contracts.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XI.

                     OF THE DIFFERENCE OF MANNERS.


[Sidenote: What is here meant by manners.]

By MANNERS, I mean not here, decency of behaviour; as how one should
salute another, or how a man should wash his mouth, or pick his teeth
before company, and such other points of the _small morals_; but those
qualities of mankind, that concern their living together in peace, and
unity. To which end we are to consider, that the felicity of this life,
consisteth not in the repose of a mind satisfied. For there is no such
_finis ultimus_, utmost aim, nor _summum bonum_, greatest good, as is
spoken of in the books of the old moral philosophers. Nor can a man any
more live, whose desires are at an end, than he, whose senses and
imaginations are at a stand. Felicity is a continual progress of the
desire, from one object to another; the attaining of the former, being
still but the way to the latter. The cause whereof is, that the object
of man’s desire, is not to enjoy once only, and for one instant of time;
but to assure for ever, the way of his future desire. And therefore the
voluntary actions, and inclinations of all men, tend, not only to the
procuring, but also to the assuring of a contented life; and differ only
in the way: which ariseth partly from the diversity of passions, in
divers men; and partly from the difference of the knowledge, or opinion
each one has of the causes, which produce the effect desired.

[Sidenote: A restless desire of power in all men.]

So that in the first place, I put for a general inclination of all
mankind, a perpetual and restless desire of power after power, that
ceaseth only in death. And the cause of this, is not always that a man
hopes for a more intensive delight, than he has already attained to; or
that he cannot be content with a moderate power: but because he cannot
assure the power and means to live well, which he hath present, without
the acquisition of more. And from hence it is, that kings, whose power
is greatest, turn their endeavours to the assuring it at home by laws,
or abroad by wars: and when that is done, there succeedeth a new desire;
in some, of fame from new conquest; in others, of ease and sensual
pleasure; in others, of admiration, or being flattered for excellence in
some art, or other ability of the mind.

[Sidenote: Love of contention from competition.]

Competition of riches, honour, command, or other power, inclineth to
contention, enmity, and war: because the way of one competitor, to the
attaining of his desire, is to kill, subdue, supplant, or repel the
other. Particularly, competition of praise, inclineth to a reverence of
antiquity. For men contend with the living, not with the dead; to these
ascribing more than due, that they may obscure the glory of the other.

[Sidenote: Civil obedience from love of ease.]

Desire of ease, and sensual delight, disposeth men to obey a common
power: because by such desires, a man doth abandon the protection that
might be hoped for from his own industry, and labour. [Sidenote: From
fear of death, or wounds.] Fear of death, and wounds, disposeth to the
same; and for the same reason. On the contrary, needy men, and hardy,
not contented with their present condition; as also, all men that are
ambitious of military command, are inclined to continue the causes of
war; and to stir up trouble and sedition: for there is no honour
military but by war; nor any such hope to mend an ill game, as by
causing a new shuffle.

[Sidenote: And from love of arts.]

Desire of knowledge, and arts of peace, inclineth men to obey a common
power: for such desire, containeth a desire of leisure; and consequently
protection from some other power than their own.

[Sidenote: Love of virtue from love of praise.]

Desire of praise, disposeth to laudable actions, such as please them
whose judgment they value; for of those men whom we contemn, we contemn
also the praises. Desire of fame after death does the same. And though
after death, there be no sense of the praise given us on earth, as being
joys, that are either swallowed up in the unspeakable joys of Heaven, or
extinguished in the extreme torments of hell: yet is not such fame vain;
because men have a present delight therein, from the foresight of it,
and of the benefit that may redound thereby to their posterity: which
though they now see not, yet they imagine; and anything that is pleasure
to the sense, the same also is pleasure in the imagination.

[Sidenote: Hate, from difficulty of requiting great benefits.]

To have received from one, to whom we think ourselves equal, greater
benefits than there is hope to requite, disposeth to counterfeit love;
but really secret hatred; and puts a man into the estate of a desperate
debtor, that in declining the sight of his creditor, tacitly wishes him
there, where he might never see him more. For benefits oblige, and
obligation is thraldom; and unrequitable obligation perpetual thraldom;
which is to one’s equal, hateful. But to have received benefits from
one, whom we acknowledge for superior, inclines to love; because the
obligation is no new depression: and cheerful acceptation, which men
call _gratitude_, is such an honour done to the obliger, as is taken
generally for retribution. Also to receive benefits, though from an
equal, or inferior, as long as there is hope of requital, disposeth to
love: for in the intention of the receiver, the obligation is of aid and
service mutual; from whence proceedeth an emulation of who shall exceed
in benefiting; the most noble and profitable contention possible;
wherein the victor is pleased with his victory, and the other revenged
by confessing it.

[Sidenote: And from conscience of deserving to be hated.]

To have done more hurt to a man, than he can, or is willing to expiate,
inclineth the doer to hate the sufferer. For he must expect revenge, or
forgiveness; both which are hateful.

[Sidenote: Promptness to hurt, from fear.]

Fear of oppression, disposeth a man to anticipate, or to seek aid by
society: for there is no other way by which a man can secure his life
and liberty.

[Sidenote: And from distrust of their own wit.]

Men that distrust their own subtlety, are, in tumult and sedition,
better disposed for victory, than they that suppose themselves wise, or
crafty. For these love to consult, the other, fearing to be
circumvented, to strike first. And in sedition, men being always in the
precincts of battle, to hold together, and use all advantages of force,
is a better stratagem, than any that can proceed from subtlety of wit.

[Sidenote: Vain undertaking from vain-glory.]

Vain-glorious men, such as without being conscious to themselves of
great sufficiency, delight in supposing themselves gallant men, are
inclined only to ostentation; but not to attempt: because when danger or
difficulty appears, they look for nothing but to have their
insufficiency discovered.

Vain-glorious men, such as estimate their sufficiency by the flattery of
other men, or the fortune of some precedent action, without assured
ground of hope from the true knowledge of themselves, are inclined to
rash engaging; and in the approach of danger, or difficulty, to retire
if they can: because not seeing the way of safety, they will rather
hazard their honour, which may be salved with an excuse; than their
lives, for which no salve is sufficient.

[Sidenote: Ambition, from opinion of sufficiency.]

Men that have a strong opinion of their own wisdom in matter of
government, are disposed to ambition. Because without public employment
in council or magistracy, the honour of their wisdom is lost. And
therefore eloquent speakers are inclined to ambition; for eloquence
seemeth wisdom, both to themselves and others.

[Sidenote: Irresolution, from too great valuing of small matters.]

Pusillanimity disposeth men to irresolution, and consequently to lose
the occasions, and fittest opportunities of action. For after men have
been in deliberation till the time of action approach, if it be not then
manifest what is best to be done, it is a sign, the difference of
motives, the one way and the other, are not great: therefore not to
resolve then, is to lose the occasion by weighing of trifles; which is
pusillanimity.

Frugality, though in poor men a virtue, maketh a man unapt to atchieve
such actions, as require the strength of many men at once: for it
weakeneth their endeavour, which is to be nourished and kept in vigour
by reward.

[Sidenote: Confidence in others, from ignorance of the marks of wisdom
           and kindness.]

Eloquence, with flattery, disposeth men to confide in them that have it;
because the former is seeming wisdom, the latter seeming kindness. Add
to them military reputation, and it disposeth men to adhere, and subject
themselves to those men that have them. The two former having given them
caution against danger from him; the latter gives them caution against
danger from others.

[Sidenote: And from ignorance of natural causes.]

Want of science, that is, ignorance of causes, disposeth, or rather
constraineth a man to rely on the advice, and authority of others. For
all men whom the truth concerns, if they rely not on their own, must
rely on the opinion of some other, whom they think wiser than
themselves, and see not why he should deceive them.

[Sidenote: And from want of understanding.]

Ignorance of the signification of words, which is want of understanding,
disposeth men to take on trust, not only the truth they know not; but
also the errors; and which is more, the nonsense of them they trust: for
neither error nor nonsense, can without a perfect understanding of
words, be detected.

From the same it proceedeth, that men give different names, to one and
the same thing, from the difference of their own passions: as they that
approve a private opinion, call it opinion; but they that mislike it,
heresy: and yet heresy signifies no more than private opinion; but has
only a greater tincture of choler.

From the same also it proceedeth, that men cannot distinguish, without
study and great understanding, between one action of many men, and many
actions of one multitude; as for example, between one action of all the
senators of Rome in killing Cataline, and the many actions of a number
of senators in killing Cæsar; and therefore are disposed to take for the
action of the people, that which is a multitude of actions done by a
multitude of men, led perhaps by the persuasion of one.

[Sidenote: Adherence to custom, from ignorance of the nature of right
           and wrong.]

Ignorance of the causes, and original constitution of right, equity,
law, and justice, disposeth a man to make custom and example the rule of
his actions; in such manner, as to think that unjust which it hath been
the custom to punish; and that just, of the impunity and approbation
whereof they can produce an example, or, as the lawyers which only use
this false measure of justice barbarously call it, a precedent; like
little children, that have no other rule of good and evil manners, but
the correction they receive from their parents and masters; save that
children are constant to their rule, whereas, men are not so; because
grown old, and stubborn, they appeal from custom to reason, and from
reason to custom, as it serves their turn; receding from custom when
their interest requires it, and setting themselves against reason, as
oft as reason is against them: which is the cause, that the doctrine of
right and wrong, is perpetually disputed, both by the pen and the sword:
whereas the doctrine of lines, and figures, is not so; because men care
not, in that subject, what be truth, as a thing that crosses no man’s
ambition, profit or lust. For I doubt not, but if it had been a thing
contrary to any man’s right of dominion, or to the interest of men that
have dominion, _that the three angles of a triangle, should be equal to
two angles of a square_; that doctrine should have been, if not
disputed, yet by the burning of all books of geometry, suppressed, as
far as he whom it concerned was able.

[Sidenote: Adherence to private men, from ignorance of the causes of
           peace.]

Ignorance of remote causes, disposeth men to attribute all events, to
the causes immediate, and instrumental: for these are all the causes
they perceive. And hence it comes to pass, that in all places, men that
are grieved with payments to the public, discharge their anger upon the
publicans, that is to say, farmers, collectors, and other officers of
the public revenue; and adhere to such as find fault with the public
government; and thereby, when they have engaged themselves beyond hope
of justification, fall also upon the supreme authority, for fear of
punishment, or shame of receiving pardon.

[Sidenote: Credulity, from ignorance of nature.]

Ignorance of natural causes, disposeth a man to credulity, so as to
believe many times impossibilities: for such know nothing to the
contrary, but that they may be true; being unable to detect the
impossibility. And credulity, because men like to be hearkened unto in
company, disposeth them to lying: so that ignorance itself without
malice, is able to make a man both to believe lies, and tell them; and
sometimes also to invent them.

[Sidenote: Curiosity to know, from care of future time.]

Anxiety for the future time, disposeth men to inquire into the causes of
things: because the knowledge of them, maketh men the better able to
order the present to their best advantage.

[Sidenote: Natural religion from the same.]

Curiosity, or love of the knowledge of causes, draws a man from the
consideration of the effect, to seek the cause; and again, the cause of
that cause; till of necessity he must come to this thought at last, that
there is some cause, whereof there is no former cause, but is eternal;
which is it men call God. So that it is impossible to make any profound
inquiry into natural causes, without being inclined thereby to believe
there is one God eternal; though they cannot have any idea of him in
their mind, answerable to his nature. For as a man that is born blind,
hearing men talk of warming themselves by the fire, and being brought to
warm himself by the same, may easily conceive, and assure himself, there
is somewhat there, which men call _fire_, and is the cause of the heat
he feels; but cannot imagine what it is like; nor have an idea of it in
his mind, such as they have that see it: so also by the visible things
in this world, and their admirable order, a man may conceive there is a
cause of them, which men call God; and yet not have an idea, or image of
him in his mind.

And they that make little, or no inquiry into the natural causes of
things, yet from the fear that proceeds from the ignorance itself, of
what it is that hath the power to do them much good or harm, are
inclined to suppose, and feign unto themselves, several kinds of powers
invisible; and to stand in awe of their own imaginations; and in time of
distress to invoke them; as also in the time of an expected good
success, to give them thanks; making the creatures of their own fancy,
their gods. By which means it hath come to pass, that from the
innumerable variety of fancy, men have created in the world innumerable
sorts of gods. And this fear of things invisible, is the natural seed of
that, which every one in himself calleth religion; and in them that
worship, or fear that power otherwise than they do, superstition.

And this seed of religion, having been observed by many; some of those
that have observed it, have been inclined thereby to nourish, dress, and
form it into laws; and to add to it of their own invention, any opinion
of the causes of future events, by which they thought they should be
best able to govern others, and make unto themselves the greatest use of
their powers.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XII.

                              OF RELIGION.


[Sidenote: Religion in man only.]

Seeing there are no signs, nor fruit of _religion_, but in man only;
there it no cause to doubt, but that the seed of _religion_, is also
only in man; and consisteth in some peculiar quality, or at least in
some eminent degree thereof, not to be found in any other living
creatures.

[Sidenote: First, from his desire of knowing causes.]

And first, it is peculiar to the nature of man, to be inquisitive into
the causes of the events they see, some more, some less; but all men so
much, as to be curious in the search of the causes of their own good and
evil fortune.

[Sidenote: From the consideration of the beginning of things.]

Secondly, upon the sight of anything that hath a beginning, to think
also it had a cause, which determined the same to begin, then when it
did, rather than sooner or later.

[Sidenote: From his observation of the sequel of things.]

Thirdly, whereas there is no other felicity of beasts, but the enjoying
of their quotidian food, ease, and lusts; as having little or no
foresight of the time to come, for want of observation, and memory of
the order, consequence, and dependence of the things they see; man
observeth how one event hath been produced by another; and remembereth
in them antecedence and consequence; and when he cannot assure himself
of the true causes of things, (for the causes of good and evil fortune
for the most part are invisible,) he supposes causes of them, either
such as his own fancy suggesteth; or trusteth the authority of other
men, such as he thinks to be his friends, and wiser than himself.

[Sidenote: The natural cause of religion, the anxiety of the time to
           come.]

The two first, make anxiety. For being assured that there be causes of
all things that have arrived hitherto, or shall arrive hereafter; it is
impossible for a man, who continually endeavoureth to secure himself
against the evil he fears, and procure the good he desireth, not to be
in a perpetual solicitude of the time to come; so that every man,
especially those that are over provident, are in a state like to that of
Prometheus. For as Prometheus, which interpreted, is, _the prudent man_,
was bound to the hill Caucasus, a place of large prospect, where, an
eagle feeding on his liver, devoured in the day, as much as was repaired
in the night: so that man, which looks too far before him, in the care
of future time, hath his heart all the day long, gnawed on by fear of
death, poverty, or other calamity; and has no repose, nor pause of his
anxiety, but in sleep.

[Sidenote: Which makes them fear the power of invisible things.]

This perpetual fear, always accompanying mankind in the ignorance of
causes, as it were in the dark, must needs have for object something.
And therefore when there is nothing to be seen, there is nothing to
accuse, either of their good, or evil fortune, but some _power_, or
agent _invisible_: in which sense perhaps it was, that some of the old
poets said, that the gods were at first created by human fear: which
spoken of the gods, that is to say, of the many gods of the Gentiles, is
very true. But the acknowledging of one God, eternal, infinite, and
omnipotent, may more easily be derived, from the desire men have to know
the causes of natural bodies, and their several virtues, and operations;
than from the fear of what was to befall them in time to come. For he
that from any effect he seeth come to pass, should reason to the next
and immediate cause thereof, and from thence to the cause of that cause,
and plunge himself profoundly in the pursuit of causes; shall at last
come to this, that there must be, as even the heathen philosophers
confessed, one first mover; that is, a first, and an eternal cause of
all things; which is that which men mean by the name of God: and all
this without thought of their fortune; the solicitude whereof, both
inclines to fear, and hinders them from the search of the causes of
other things; and thereby gives occasion of feigning of as many gods, as
there be men that feign them.

[Sidenote: And suppose them incorporeal.]

And for the matter, or substance of the invisible agents, so fancied;
they could not by natural cogitation, fall upon any other conceit, but
that it was the same with that of the soul of man; and that the soul of
man, was of the same substance, with that which appeareth in a dream, to
one that sleepeth; or in a looking-glass, to one that is awake; which,
men not knowing that such apparitions are nothing else but creatures of
the fancy, think to be real, and external substances; and therefore call
them ghosts; as the Latins called them _imagines_, and _umbræ_; and
thought them spirits, that is, thin aerial bodies; and those invisible
agents, which they feared, to be like them; save that they appear, and
vanish when they please. But the opinion that such spirits were
incorporeal, or immaterial, could never enter into the mind of any man
by nature; because, though men may put together words of contradictory
signification, as _spirit_, and _incorporeal_; yet they can never have
the imagination of any thing answering to them: and therefore, men that
by their own meditation, arrive to the acknowledgment of one infinite,
omnipotent, and eternal God, chose rather to confess he is
incomprehensible, and above their understanding, than to define his
nature by _spirit incorporeal_, and then confess their definition to be
unintelligible: or if they give him such a title, it is not
_dogmatically_, with intention to make the divine nature understood; but
_piously_, to honour him with attributes, of significations, as remote
as they can from the grossness of bodies visible.

[Sidenote: But know not the way how they effect anything.]

Then, for the way by which they think these invisible agents wrought
their effects; that is to say, what immediate causes they used, in
bringing things to pass, men that know not what it is that we call
_causing_, that is, almost all men, have no other rule to guess by, but
by observing, and remembering what they have seen to precede the like
effect at some other time, or times before, without seeing between the
antecedent and subsequent event, any dependence or connexion at all: and
therefore from the like things past, they expect the like things to
come; and hope for good or evil luck, superstitiously, from things that
have no part at all in the causing of it: as the Athenians did for their
war at Lepanto, demand another Phormio; the Pompeian faction for their
war in Africa, another Scipio; and others have done in divers other
occasions since. In like manner they attribute their fortune to a
stander by, to a lucky or unlucky place, to words spoken, especially if
the name of God be amongst them; as charming and conjuring, the liturgy
of witches; insomuch as to believe, they have power to turn a stone into
bread, bread into a man, or any thing into any thing.

[Sidenote: But honour them as they honour men.]

Thirdly, for the worship which naturally men exhibit to powers
invisible, it can be no other, but such expressions of their reverence,
as they would use towards men; gifts, petitions, thanks, submission of
body, considerate addresses, sober behaviour, premeditated words,
swearing, that is, assuring one another of their promises, by invoking
them. Beyond that reason suggesteth nothing; but leaves them either to
rest there; or for further ceremonies, to rely on those they believe to
be wiser than themselves.

[Sidenote: And attribute to them all extraordinary events.]

Lastly, concerning how these invisible powers declare to men the things
which shall hereafter come to pass, especially concerning their good or
evil fortune in general, or good or ill success in any particular
undertaking, men are naturally at a stand; save that using to conjecture
of the time to come, by the time past, they are very apt, not only to
take casual things, after one or two encounters, for prognostics of the
like encounter ever after, but also to believe the like prognostics from
other men, of whom they have once conceived a good opinion.

[Sidenote: Four things, natural seeds of religion.]

And in these four things, opinion of ghosts, ignorance of second causes,
devotion towards what men fear, and taking of things casual for
prognostics, consisteth the natural seed of _religion_; which by reason
of the different fancies, judgments, and passions of several men, hath
grown up into ceremonies so different, that those which are used by one
man, are for the most part ridiculous to another.

[Sidenote: Made different by culture.]

For these seeds have received culture from two sorts of men. One sort
have been they, that have nourished, and ordered them, according to
their own invention. The other have done it, by God’s commandment, and
direction: but both sorts have done it, with a purpose to make those men
that relied on them, the more apt to obedience, laws, peace, charity,
and civil society. So that the religion of the former sort, is a part of
human politics; and teacheth part of the duty which earthly kings
require of their subjects. And the religion of the latter sort is divine
politics; and containeth precepts to those that have yielded themselves
subjects in the kingdom of God. Of the former sort, were all the
founders of common-wealths, and the lawgivers of the Gentiles: of the
latter sort, were Abraham, Moses, and our blessed Saviour; by whom have
been derived unto us the laws of the kingdom of God.

[Sidenote: The absurd opinion of Gentilism.]

And for that part of religion, which consisteth in opinions concerning
the nature of powers invisible, there is almost nothing that has a name,
that has not been esteemed amongst the Gentiles, in one place or
another, a god, or devil; or by their poets feigned to be inanimated,
inhabited, or possessed by some spirit or other.

The unformed matter of the world, was a god, by the name of Chaos.

The heaven, the ocean, the planets, the fire, the earth, the winds, were
so many gods.

[Sidenote: The absurd opinion of Gentilism.]

Men, women, a bird, a crocodile, a calf, a dog, a snake, an onion, a
leek, were deified. Besides that, they filled almost all places, with
spirits called _demons_: the plains, with Pan, and Panises, or Satyrs;
the woods, with Fawns, and Nymphs; the sea, with Tritons, and other
Nymphs; every river, and fountain, with a ghost of his name, and with
Nymphs; every house with its _Lares_, or familiars; every man with his
_Genius_; hell with ghosts, and spiritual officers, as Charon, Cerberus,
and the Furies; and in the night time, all places with _larvæ_,
_lemures_, ghosts of men deceased, and a whole kingdom of fairies and
bugbears. They have also ascribed divinity, and built temples to meer
accidents, and qualities; such as are time, night, day, peace, concord,
love, contention, virtue, honour, health, rust, fever, and the like;
which when they prayed for, or against, they prayed to, as if there were
ghosts of those names hanging over their heads, and letting fall, or
withholding that good, or evil, for, or against which they prayed. They
invoked also their own wit, by the name of Muses; their own ignorance,
by the name of Fortune; their own lusts by the name of Cupid; their own
rage, by the name of Furies; their own privy members, by the name of
Priapus; and attributed their pollutions, to Incubi, and Succubæ:
insomuch as there was nothing, which a poet could introduce as a person
in his poem, which they did not make either a _god_, or a _devil_.

The same authors of the religion of the Gentiles, observing the second
ground for religion, which is men’s ignorance of causes; and thereby
their aptness to attribute their fortune to causes, on which there was
no dependence at all apparent, took occasion to obtrude on their
ignorance, instead of second causes, a kind of second and ministerial
gods; ascribing the cause of fecundity, to Venus; the cause of arts, to
Apollo; of subtlety and craft, to Mercury; of tempests and storms, to
Æolus; and of other effects, to other gods; insomuch as there was
amongst the heathen almost as great variety of gods, as of business.

And to the worship, which naturally men conceived fit to be used towards
their gods, namely, oblations, prayers, thanks, and the rest formerly
named; the same legislators of the Gentiles have added their images,
both in picture, and sculpture; that the more ignorant sort, that is to
say, the most part or generality of the people, thinking the gods for
whose representation they were made, were really included, and as it
were housed within them, might so much the more stand in fear of them:
and endowed them with lands, and houses, and officers, and revenues, set
apart from all other human uses; that is, consecrated, and made holy to
those their idols; as caverns, groves, woods, mountains, and whole
islands; and have attributed to them, not only the shapes, some of men,
some of beasts, some of monsters; but also the faculties, and passions
of men and beasts: as sense, speech, sex, lust, generation, and this not
only by mixing one with another, to propagate the kind of gods; but also
by mixing with men, and women, to beget mongrel gods, and but inmates of
heaven, as Bacchus, Hercules, and others; besides anger, revenge, and
other passions of living creatures, and the actions proceeding from
them, as fraud, theft, adultery, sodomy, and any vice that may be taken
for an effect of power, or a cause of pleasure; and all such vices, as
amongst men are taken to be against law, rather than against honour.

Lastly, to the prognostics of time to come; which are naturally, but
conjectures upon experience of time past; and supernaturally, divine
revelation; the same authors of the religion of the Gentiles, partly
upon pretended experience, partly upon pretended revelation, have added
innumerable other superstitious ways of divination; and made men believe
they should find their fortunes, sometimes in the ambiguous or senseless
answers of the priests at Delphi, Delos, Ammon, and other famous
oracles; which answers, were made ambiguous by design, to own the event
both ways; or absurd, by the intoxicating vapour of the place, which is
very frequent in sulphurous caverns: sometimes in the leaves of the
Sybils; of whose prophecies, like those perhaps of Nostradamus (for the
fragments now extant seem to be the invention of later times), there
were some books in reputation in the time of the Roman republic:
sometimes in the insignificant speeches of madmen, supposed to be
possessed with a divine spirit, which possession they called enthusiasm;
and these kinds of foretelling events, were accounted theomancy, or
prophecy: sometimes in the aspect of the stars at their nativity; which
was called horoscopy, and esteemed a part of judiciary astrology:
sometimes in their own hopes and fears, called thumomancy, or presage:
sometimes in the prediction of witches, that pretended conference with
the dead; which is called necromancy, conjuring, and witchcraft; and is
but juggling and confederate knavery: sometimes in the casual flight, or
feeding of birds; called augury: sometimes in the entrails of a
sacrificed beast; which was _aruspicina_: sometimes in dreams: sometimes
in croaking of ravens, or chattering of birds: sometimes in the
lineaments of the face; which was called metoposcopy; or by palmistry in
the lines of the hand; in casual words, called _omina_: sometimes in
monsters, or unusual accidents; as eclipses, comets, rare meteors,
earthquakes, inundations, uncouth births, and the like, which they
called _portenta_, and _ostenta_, because they thought them to portend,
or foreshow some great calamity to come; sometimes, in mere lottery, as
cross and pile; counting holes in a sieve; dipping of verses in Homer,
and Virgil; and innumerable other such vain conceits. So easy are men to
be drawn to believe any thing, from such men as have gotten credit with
them; and can with gentleness, and dexterity, take hold of their fear,
and ignorance.

[Sidenote: The designs of the authors of the religion of the heathen.]

And therefore the first founders, and legislators of commonwealths among
the Gentiles, whose ends were only to keep the people in obedience, and
peace, have in all places taken care; first, to imprint in their minds a
belief, that those precepts which they gave concerning religion, might
not be thought to proceed from their own device, but from the dictates
of some god, or other spirit; or else that they themselves were of a
higher nature than mere mortals, that their laws might the more easily
be received: so Numa Pompilius pretended to receive the ceremonies he
instituted amongst the Romans, from the nymph Egeria: and the first king
and founder of the kingdom of Peru, pretended himself and his wife to be
the children of the Sun; and Mahomet, to set up his new religion,
pretended to have conferences with the Holy Ghost, in form of a dove.
Secondly, they have had a care, to make it believed, that the same
things were displeasing to the gods, which were forbidden by the laws.
Thirdly, to prescribe ceremonies, supplications, sacrifices, and
festivals, by which they were to believe, the anger of the gods might be
appeased; and that ill success in war, great contagions of sickness,
earthquakes, and each man’s private misery, came from the anger of the
gods, and their anger from the neglect of their worship, or the
forgetting, or mistaking some point of the ceremonies required. And
though amongst the ancient Romans, men were not forbidden to deny, that
which in the poets is written of the pains, and pleasures after this
life: which divers of great authority, and gravity in that state have in
their harangues openly derided; yet that belief was always more
cherished, than the contrary.

And by these, and such other institutions, they obtained in order to
their end, which was the peace of the commonwealth, that the common
people in their misfortunes, laying the fault on neglect, or error in
their ceremonies, or on their own disobedience to the laws, were the
less apt to mutiny against their governors; and being entertained with
the pomp, and pastime of festivals, and public games, made in honour of
the gods, needed nothing else but bread to keep them from discontent,
murmuring, and commotion against the state. And therefore the Romans,
that had conquered the greatest part of the then known world, made no
scruple of tolerating any religion whatsoever in the city of Rome
itself; unless it had something in it, that could not consist with their
civil government; nor do we read, that any religion was there forbidden,
but that of the Jews; who, being the peculiar kingdom of God, thought it
unlawful to acknowledge subjection to any mortal king or state
whatsoever. And thus you see how the religion of the Gentiles was a part
of their policy.

[Sidenote: The true religion and the laws of God’s kingdom the same.]

But where God himself, by supernatural revelation, planted religion;
there he also made to himself a peculiar kingdom: and gave laws, not
only of behaviour towards himself, but also towards one another; and
thereby in the kingdom of God, the policy, and laws civil, are a part of
religion; and therefore the distinction of temporal, and spiritual
domination, hath there no place. It is true, that God is king of all the
earth: yet may he be king of a peculiar, and chosen nation. For there is
no more incongruity therein, than that he that hath the general command
of the whole army, should have withal a peculiar regiment, or company of
his own. God is king of all the earth by his power: but of his chosen
people, he is king by covenant. But to speak more largely of the kingdom
of God, both by nature, and covenant, I have in the following discourse
assigned another place (chapter XXXV.)

From the propagation of religion, it is not hard to understand the
causes of the resolution of the same into its first seeds, or
principles; which are only an opinion of a deity, and powers invisible,
and supernatural; that can never be so abolished out of human nature,
but that new religions may again be made to spring out of them, by the
culture of such men, as for such purpose are in reputation.

[Sidenote: The causes of change in religion.]

For seeing all formed religion, is founded at first, upon the faith
which a multitude hath in some one person, whom they believe not only to
be a wise man, and to labour to procure their happiness, but also to be
a holy man, to whom God himself vouchsafeth to declare his will
supernaturally; it followeth necessarily, when they that have the
government of religion, shall come to have either the wisdom of those
men, their sincerity, or their love suspected; or when they shall be
unable to show any probable token of divine revelation; that the
religion which they desire to uphold, must be suspected likewise; and,
without the fear of the civil sword, contradicted and rejected.

[Sidenote: Enjoining belief of impossibilities.]

That which taketh away the reputation of wisdom, in him that formeth a
religion, or addeth to it when it is already formed, is the enjoining of
a belief of contradictories: for both parts of a contradiction cannot
possibly be true: and therefore to enjoin the belief of them, is an
argument of ignorance; which detects the author in that; and discredits
him in all things else he shall propound as from revelation
supernatural: which revelation a man may indeed have of many things
above, but of nothing against natural reason.

[Sidenote: Doing contrary to the religion they establish.]

That which taketh away the reputation of sincerity, is the doing or
saying of such things, as appear to be signs, that what they require
other men to believe, is not believed by themselves; all which doings,
or sayings are therefore called scandalous, because they be stumbling
blocks, that make men to fall in the way of religion; as injustice,
cruelty, profaneness, avarice, and luxury. For who can believe, that he
that doth ordinarily such actions as proceed from any of these roots,
believeth there is any such invisible power to be feared, as he
affrighteth other men withal, for lesser faults?

That which taketh away the reputation of love, is the being detected of
private ends: as when the belief they require of others, conduceth or
seemeth to conduce to the acquiring of dominion, riches, dignity, or
secure pleasure, to themselves only, or specially. For that which men
reap benefit by to themselves, they are thought to do for their own
sakes, and not for love of others.

[Sidenote: Want of the testimony of miracles.]

Lastly, the testimony that men can render of divine calling, can be no
other, than the operation of miracles; or true prophecy, which also is a
miracle; or extraordinary felicity. And therefore, to those points of
religion, which have been received from them that did such miracles;
those that are added by such, as approve not their calling by some
miracle, obtain no greater belief, than what the custom and laws of the
places, in which they be educated, have wrought into them. For as in
natural things, men of judgment require natural signs, and arguments; so
in supernatural things, they require signs supernatural, which are
miracles, before they consent inwardly, and from their hearts.

All which causes of the weakening of men’s faith, do manifestly appear
in the examples following. First, we have the example of the children of
Israel; who when Moses, that had approved his calling to them by
miracles, and by the happy conduct of them out of Egypt, was absent but
forty days, revolted from the worship of the true God, recommended to
them by him; and setting up (_Exod._ xxxiii. 1, 2) a golden calf for
their god, relapsed into the idolatry of the Egyptians; from whom they
had been so lately delivered. And again, after Moses, Aaron, Joshua, and
that generation which had seen the great works of God in Israel,
(_Judges_ ii. 11) were dead; another generation arose, and served Baal.
So that miracles failing, faith also failed.

Again, when the sons of Samuel, (_1 Sam._ viii. 3) being constituted by
their father judges in Bersabee, received bribes, and judged unjustly,
the people of Israel refused any more to have God to be their king, in
other manner than he was king of other people; and therefore cried out
to Samuel, to choose them a king after the manner of the nations. So
that justice failing, faith also failed: insomuch, as they deposed their
God, from reigning over them.

And whereas in the planting of Christian religion, the oracles ceased in
all parts of the Roman empire, and the number of Christians increased
wonderfully every day, and in every place, by the preaching of the
Apostles, and Evangelists; a great part of that success, may reasonably
be attributed, to the contempt, into which the priests of the Gentiles
of that time, had brought themselves, by their uncleanness, avarice, and
juggling between princes. Also the religion of the church of Rome, was
partly, for the same cause abolished in England, and many other parts of
Christendom; insomuch, as the failing of virtue in the pastors, maketh
faith fail in the people: and partly from bringing of the philosophy,
and doctrine of Aristotle into religion, by the Schoolmen; from whence
there arose so many contradictions, and absurdities, as brought the
clergy into a reputation both of ignorance, and of fraudulent intention;
and inclined people to revolt from them, either against the will of
their own princes, as in France and Holland; or with their will, as in
England.

Lastly, amongst the points by the church of Rome declared necessary for
salvation, there be so many, manifestly to the advantage of the Pope,
and of his spiritual subjects, residing in the territories of other
Christian princes, that were it not for the mutual emulation of those
princes, they might without war, or trouble, exclude all foreign
authority, as easily as it has been excluded in England. For who is
there that does not see, to whose benefit it conduceth, to have it
believed, that a king hath not his authority from Christ, unless a
bishop crown him? That a king, if he be a priest, cannot marry? That
whether a prince be born in lawful marriage, or not, must be judged by
authority from Rome? That subjects may be freed from their allegiance,
if by the court of Rome, the king be judged an heretic? That a king, as
Chilperic of France, may be deposed by a pope, as Pope Zachary, for no
cause; and his kingdom given to one of his subjects? That the clergy and
regulars, in what country soever, shall be exempt from the jurisdiction
of their king in cases criminal? Or who does not see, to whose profit
redound the fees of private masses, and vales of purgatory; with other
signs of private interest, enough to mortify the most lively faith, if,
as I said, the civil magistrate, and custom did not more sustain it,
than any opinion they have of the sanctity, wisdom, or probity of their
teachers? So that I may attribute all the changes of religion in the
world, to one and the same cause; and that is, unpleasing priests; and
those not only amongst Catholics, but even in that church that hath
presumed most of reformation.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XIII.

                 OF THE NATURAL CONDITION OF MANKIND AS
                 CONCERNING THEIR FELICITY, AND MISERY.


[Sidenote: Men by nature equal.]

Nature hath made men so equal, in the faculties of the body, and mind;
as that though there be found one man sometimes manifestly stronger in
body, or of quicker mind than another; yet when all is reckoned
together, the difference between man, and man, is not so considerable,
as that one man can thereupon claim to himself any benefit, to which
another may not pretend, as well as he. For as to the strength of body,
the weakest has strength enough to kill the strongest, either by secret
machination, or by confederacy with others, that are in the same danger
with himself.

And as to the faculties of the mind, setting aside the arts grounded
upon words, and especially that skill of proceeding upon general, and
infallible rules, called science; which very few have, and but in few
things; as being not a native faculty, born with us; nor attained, as
prudence, while we look after somewhat else, I find yet a greater
equality amongst men, than that of strength. For prudence, is but
experience; which equal time, equally bestows on all men, in those
things they equally apply themselves unto. That which may perhaps make
such equality incredible, is but a vain conceit of one’s own wisdom,
which almost all men think they have in a greater degree, than the
vulgar; that is, than all men but themselves, and a few others, whom by
fame, or for concurring with themselves, they approve. For such is the
nature of men, that howsoever they may acknowledge many others to be
more witty, or more eloquent, or more learned; yet they will hardly
believe there be many so wise as themselves; for they see their own wit
at hand, and other men’s at a distance. But this proveth rather that men
are in that point equal, than unequal. For there is not ordinarily a
greater sign of the equal distribution of any thing, than that every man
is contented with his share.

[Sidenote: From equality proceeds diffidence.]

From this equality of ability, ariseth equality of hope in the attaining
of our ends. And therefore if any two men desire the same thing, which
nevertheless they cannot both enjoy, they become enemies; and in the way
to their end, which is principally their own conservation, and sometimes
their delectation only, endeavour to destroy, or subdue one another. And
from hence it comes to pass, that where an invader hath no more to fear,
than another man’s single power; if one plant, sow, build, or possess a
convenient seat, others may probably be expected to come prepared with
forces united, to dispossess, and deprive him, not only of the fruit of
his labour, but also of his life, or liberty. And the invader again is
in the like danger of another.

[Sidenote: From diffidence war.]

And from this diffidence of one another, there is no way for any man to
secure himself, so reasonable, as anticipation; that is, by force, or
wiles, to master the persons of all men he can, so long, till he see no
other power great enough to endanger him: and this is no more than his
own conservation requireth, and is generally allowed. Also because there
be some, that taking pleasure in contemplating their own power in the
acts of conquest, which they pursue farther than their security
requires; if others, that otherwise would be glad to be at ease within
modest bounds, should not by invasion increase their power, they would
not be able, long time, by standing only on their defence, to subsist.
And by consequence, such augmentation of dominion over men being
necessary to a man’s conservation, it ought to be allowed him.

Again, men have no pleasure, but on the contrary a great deal of grief,
in keeping company, where there is no power able to over-awe them all.
For every man looketh that his companion should value him, at the same
rate he sets upon himself: and upon all signs of contempt, or
undervaluing, naturally endeavours, as far as he dares, (which amongst
them that have no common power to keep them in quiet, is far enough to
make them destroy each other), to extort a greater value from his
contemners, by damage; and from others, by the example.

So that in the nature of man, we find three principal causes of quarrel.
First, competition; secondly, diffidence; thirdly, glory.

The first, maketh men invade for gain; the second, for safety; and the
third, for reputation. The first use violence, to make themselves
masters of other men’s persons, wives, children, and cattle; the second,
to defend them; the third, for trifles, as a word, a smile, a different
opinion, and any other sign of undervalue, either direct in their
persons, or by reflection in their kindred, their friends, their nation,
their profession, or their name.

[Sidenote: Out of civil states, there is always war of every one against
           every one.]

Hereby it is manifest, that during the time men live without a common
power to keep them all in awe, they are in that condition which is
called war; and such a war, as is of every man, against every man. For
WAR, consisteth not in battle only, or the act of fighting; but in a
tract of time, wherein the will to contend by battle is sufficiently
known: and therefore the notion of _time_, is to be considered in the
nature of war; as it is in the nature of weather. For as the nature of
foul weather, lieth not in a shower or two of rain; but in an
inclination thereto of many days together: so the nature of war,
consisteth not in actual fighting; but in the known disposition thereto,
during all the time there is no assurance to the contrary. All other
time is PEACE.

[Sidenote: The incommodities of such a war.]

Whatsoever therefore is consequent to a time of war, where every man is
enemy to every man; the same is consequent to the time, wherein men live
without other security, than what their own strength, and their own
invention shall furnish them withal. In such condition, there is no
place for industry; because the fruit thereof is uncertain: and
consequently no culture of the earth; no navigation, nor use of the
commodities that may be imported by sea; no commodious building; no
instruments of moving, and removing, such things as require much force;
no knowledge of the face of the earth; no account of time; no arts; no
letters; no society; and which is worst of all, continual fear, and
danger of violent death; and the life of man, solitary, poor, nasty,
brutish, and short.

It may seem strange to some man, that has not well weighed these things;
that nature should thus dissociate, and render men apt to invade, and
destroy one another: and he may therefore, not trusting to this
inference, made from the passions, desire perhaps to have the same
confirmed by experience. Let him therefore consider with himself, when
taking a journey, he arms himself, and seeks to go well accompanied;
when going to sleep, he locks his doors; when even in his house he locks
his chests; and this when he knows there be laws, and public officers,
armed, to revenge all injuries shall be done him; what opinion he has of
his fellow-subjects, when he rides armed; of his fellow citizens, when
he locks his doors; and of his children, and servants, when he locks his
chests. Does he not there as much accuse mankind by his actions, as I do
by my words? But neither of us accuse man’s nature in it. The desires,
and other passions of man, are in themselves no sin. No more are the
actions, that proceed from those passions, till they know a law that
forbids them: which till laws be made they cannot know: nor can any law
be made, till they have agreed upon the person that shall make it.

It may peradventure be thought, there was never such a time, nor
condition of war as this; and I believe it was never generally so, over
all the world: but there are many places, where they live so now. For
the savage people in many places of America, except the government of
small families, the concord whereof dependeth on natural lust, have no
government at all; and live at this day in that brutish manner, as I
said before. Howsoever, it may be perceived what manner of life there
would be, where there were no common power to fear, by the manner of
life, which men that have formerly lived under a peaceful government,
use to degenerate into, in a civil war.

But though there had never been any time, wherein particular men were in
a condition of war one against another; yet in all times, kings, and
persons of sovereign authority, because of their independency, are in
continual jealousies, and in the state and posture of gladiators; having
their weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one another; that is,
their forts, garrisons, and guns upon the frontiers of their kingdoms;
and continual spies upon their neighbours; which is a posture of war.
But because they uphold thereby, the industry of their subjects; there
does not follow from it, that misery, which accompanies the liberty of
particular men.

[Sidenote: In such a war nothing is unjust.]

To this war of every man, against every man, this also is consequent;
that nothing can be unjust. The notions of right and wrong, justice and
injustice have there no place. Where there is no common power, there is
no law: where no law, no injustice. Force, and fraud, are in war the two
cardinal virtues. Justice, and injustice are none of the faculties
neither of the body, nor mind. If they were, they might be in a man that
were alone in the world, as well as his senses, and passions. They are
qualities, that relate to men in society, not in solitude. It is
consequent also to the same condition, that there be no propriety, no
dominion, no _mine_ and _thine_ distinct; but only that to be every
man’s, that he can get; and for so long, as he can keep it. And thus
much for the ill condition, which man by mere nature is actually placed
in; though with a possibility to come out of it, consisting partly in
the passions, partly in his reason.

[Sidenote: The passions that incline men to peace.]

The passions that incline men to peace, are fear of death; desire of
such things as are necessary to commodious living; and a hope by their
industry to obtain them. And reason suggesteth convenient articles of
peace, upon which men may be drawn to agreement. These articles, are
they, which otherwise are called the Laws of Nature: whereof I shall
speak more particularly, in the two following chapters.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XIV.

               OF THE FIRST AND SECOND NATURAL LAWS, AND
                             OF CONTRACTS.


[Sidenote: Right of nature what.]

The RIGHT OF NATURE, which writers commonly call _jus naturale_, is the
liberty each man hath, to use his own power, as he will himself, for the
preservation of his own nature; that is to say, of his own life; and
consequently, of doing any thing, which in his own judgment, and reason,
he shall conceive to be the aptest means thereunto.

[Sidenote: Liberty what.]

By LIBERTY, is understood, according to the proper signification of the
word, the absence of external impediments: which impediments, may oft
take away part of a man’s power to do what he would; but cannot hinder
him from using the power left him, according as his judgment, and reason
shall dictate to him.

[Sidenote: A law of nature what.]

A LAW OF NATURE, _lex naturalis_, is a precept or general rule, found
out by reason, by which a man is forbidden to do that, which is
destructive of his life, or taketh away the means of preserving the
same; and to omit that, by which he thinketh it may be best preserved.
For though they that speak of this subject, use to confound _jus_, and
_lex_, _right_ and _law_: [Sidenote: Difference of right and law.] yet
they ought to be distinguished; because RIGHT, consisteth in liberty to
do, or to forbear; whereas LAW, determineth, and bindeth to one of them:
so that law, and right, differ as much, as obligation, and liberty;
which in one and the same matter are inconsistent.

[Sidenote: Naturally every man has right to every thing.]

And because the condition of man, as hath been declared in the precedent
chapter, is a condition of war of every one against every one; in which
case every one is governed by his own reason; and there is nothing he
can make use of, that may not be a help unto him, in preserving his life
against his enemies; it followeth, that in such a condition, every man
has a right to every thing; even to one another’s body. And therefore,
as long as this natural right of every man to every thing endureth,
there can be no security to any man, how strong or wise soever he be, of
living out the time, which nature ordinarily alloweth men to live.
[Sidenote: The fundamental law of nature.] And consequently it is a
precept, or general rule of reason, _that every man, ought to endeavour
peace, as far as he has hope of obtaining it; and when he cannot obtain
it, that he may seek, and use, all helps, and advantages of war_. The
first branch of which rule, containeth the first, and fundamental law of
nature; which is, _to seek peace, and follow it_. The second, the sum of
the right of nature; which is, _by all means we can, to defend
ourselves_.

[Sidenote: The second law of nature.]

From this fundamental law of nature, by which men are commanded to
endeavour peace, is derived this second law; _that a man be willing,
when others are so too, as far-forth, as for peace, and defence of
himself he shall think it necessary, to lay down this right to all
things; and be contented with so much liberty against other men, as he
would allow other men against himself_. For as long as every man holdeth
this right, of doing any thing he liketh; so long are all men in the
condition of war. But if other men will not lay down their right, as
well as he; then there is no reason for any one, to divest himself of
his: for that were to expose himself to prey, which no man is bound to,
rather than to dispose himself to peace. This is that law of the Gospel;
_whatsoever you require that others should do to you, that do ye to
them_. And that law of all men, _quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris_.

[Sidenote: What it is to lay down a right.]

To _lay down_ a man’s _right_ to any thing, is to _divest_ himself of
the _liberty_, of hindering another of the benefit of his own right to
the same. For he that renounceth, or passeth away his right, giveth not
to any other man a right which he had not before; because there is
nothing to which every man had not right by nature: but only standeth
out of his way, that he may enjoy his own original right, without
hindrance from him; not without hindrance from another. So that the
effect which redoundeth to one man, by another man’s defect of right, is
but so much diminution of impediments to the use of his own right
original.

[Sidenote: Renouncing a right, what it is.]

Right is laid aside, either by simply renouncing it; or by transferring
it to another. By _simply_ RENOUNCING; when he cares not to whom the
benefit thereof redoundeth. [Sidenote: Transferring right what.
Obligation.] By TRANSFERRING; when he intendeth the benefit thereof to
some certain person, or persons. And when a man hath in either manner
abandoned, or granted away his right; then is he said to be OBLIGED, or
BOUND, not to hinder those, to whom such right is granted, or abandoned,
from the benefit of it: and that he _ought_, [Sidenote: Duty.] and it is
his DUTY, not to make void that voluntary act of his own: [Sidenote:
Injustice.] and that such hindrance is INJUSTICE, and INJURY, as being
_sine jure_; the right being before renounced, or transferred. So that
_injury_, or _injustice_, in the controversies of the world, is somewhat
like to that, which in the disputations of scholars is called
_absurdity_. For as it is there called an absurdity, to contradict what
one maintained in the beginning: so in the world, it is called
injustice, and injury, voluntarily to undo that, which from the
beginning he had voluntarily done. The way by which a man either simply
renounceth, or transferreth his right, is a declaration, or
signification, by some voluntary and sufficient sign, or signs, that he
doth so renounce, or transfer; or hath so renounced, or transferred the
same, to him that accepteth it. And these signs are either words only,
or actions only; or, as it happeneth most often, both words, and
actions. And the same are the BONDS, by which men are bound, and
obliged: bonds, that have their strength, not from their own nature, for
nothing is more easily broken than a man’s word, but from fear of some
evil consequence upon the rupture.

[Sidenote: Not all rights are alienable.]

Whensoever a man transferreth his right, or renounceth it; it is either
in consideration of some right reciprocally transferred to himself; or
for some other good he hopeth for thereby. For it is a voluntary act:
and of the voluntary acts of every man, the object is some _good to
himself_. And therefore there be some rights, which no man can be
understood by any words, or other signs, to have abandoned, or
transferred. As first a man cannot lay down the right of resisting them,
that assault him by force, to take away his life; because he cannot be
understood to aim thereby, at any good to himself. The same may be said
of wounds, and chains, and imprisonment; both because there is no
benefit consequent to such patience; as there is to the patience of
suffering another to be wounded, or imprisoned: as also because a man
cannot tell, when he seeth men proceed against him by violence, whether
they intend his death or not. And lastly the motive, and end for which
this renouncing, and transferring of right is introduced, is nothing
else but the security of a man’s person, in his life, and in the means
of so preserving life, as not to be weary of it. And therefore if a man
by words, or other signs, seem to despoil himself of the end, for which
those signs were intended; he is not to be understood as if he meant it,
or that it was his will; but that he was ignorant of how such words and
actions were to be interpreted.

[Sidenote: Contract what.]

The mutual transferring of right, is that which men call CONTRACT.

There is difference between transferring of right to the thing; and
transferring, or tradition, that is delivery of the thing itself. For
the thing may be delivered together with the translation of the right;
as in buying and selling with ready-money; or exchange of goods, or
lands: and it may be delivered some time after.

[Sidenote: Covenant what.]

Again, one of the contractors, may deliver the thing contracted for on
his part, and leave the other to perform his part at some determinate
time after, and in the mean time be trusted; and then the contract on
his part, is called PACT, or COVENANT: or both parts may contract now,
to perform hereafter: in which cases, he that is to perform in time to
come, being trusted, his performance is called _keeping of promise_, or
faith; and the failing of performance, if it be voluntary, _violation of
faith_.

[Sidenote: Free-gift.]

When the transferring of right, is not mutual: but one of the parties
transferreth, in hope to gain thereby friendship, or service from
another, or from his friends; or in hope to gain the reputation of
charity, or magnanimity; or to deliver his mind from the pain of
compassion; or in hope of reward in heaven; this is not contract, but
GIFT, FREE-GIFT, GRACE: which words signify one and the same thing.

[Sidenote: Signs of contract express.]

Signs of contract, are either _express_, or _by inference_. Express, are
words spoken with understanding of what they signify: and such words are
either of the time _present_, or _past_; as, _I give_, _I grant_, _I
have given_, _I have granted_, _I will that this be yours_: or of the
future; as, _I will give_, _I will grant_: [Sidenote: Promise.] which
words of the future are called PROMISE.

[Sidenote: Signs of contract by inference.]

Signs by inference, are sometimes the consequence of words; sometimes
the consequence of silence; sometimes the consequence of actions;
sometimes the consequence of forbearing an action: and generally a sign
by inference, of any contract, is whatsoever sufficiently argues the
will of the contractor.

[Sidenote: Free gift passeth by words of the present or past.]

Words alone, if they be of the time to come, and contain a bare promise,
are an insufficient sign of a free-gift, and therefore not obligatory.
For if they be of the time to come, as _to-morrow I will give_, they are
a sign I have not given yet, and consequently that my right is not
transferred, but remaineth till I transfer it by some other act. But if
the words be of the time present, or past, as, _I have given_, or, _do
give to be delivered to-morrow_, then is my to-morrow’s right given away
to day; and that by the virtue of the words, though there were no other
argument of my will. And there is a great difference in the
signification of these words, _volo hoc tuum esse cras_, and _cras
dabo_; that is, between _I will that this be thine to-morrow_, and, _I
will give it thee to-morrow_: for the word _I will_, in the former
manner of speech, signifies an act of the will present; but in the
latter, it signifies a promise of an act of the will to come: and
therefore the former words, being of the present, transfer a future
right; the latter, that be of the future, transfer nothing. But if there
be other signs of the will to transfer a right, besides words; then,
though the gift be free, yet may the right be understood to pass by
words of the future: as if a man propound a prize to him that comes
first to the end of a race, the gift is free; and though the words be of
the future, yet the right passeth: for if he would not have his words so
be understood, he should not have let them run.

[Sidenote: Signs of contract are words both of the past, present, and
           future.]

In contracts, the right passeth, not only where the words are of the
time present, or past, but also where they are of the future: because
all contract is mutual translation, or change of right; and therefore he
that promiseth only, because he hath already received the benefit for
which he promiseth, is to be understood as if he intended the right
should pass: for unless he had been content to have his words so
understood, the other would not have performed his part first. And for
that cause, in buying, and selling, and other acts of contract, a
promise is equivalent to a covenant; and therefore obligatory.

[Sidenote: Merit what.]

He that performeth first in the case of a contract, is said to MERIT
that which he is to receive by the performance of the other; and he hath
it as _due_. Also when a prize is propounded to many, which is to be
given to him only that winneth; or money is thrown amongst many, to be
enjoyed by them that catch it; though this be a free gift; yet so to
win, or so to catch, is to _merit_, and to have it as DUE. For the right
is transferred in the propounding of the prize, and in throwing down the
money; though it be not determined to whom, but by the event of the
contention. But there is between these two sorts of merit, this
difference, that in contract, I merit by virtue of my own power, and the
contractor’s need; but in this case of free gift, I am enabled to merit
only by the benignity of the giver: in contract, I merit at the
contractor’s hand that he should depart with his right; in this case of
gift, I merit not that the giver should part with his right; but that
when he has parted with it, it should be mine, rather than another’s.
And this I think to be the meaning of that distinction of the Schools,
between _meritum congrui_, and _meritum condigni_. For God Almighty,
having promised Paradise to those men, hoodwinked with carnal desires,
that can walk through this world according to the precepts, and limits
prescribed by him; they say, he that shall so walk, shall merit Paradise
_ex congruo_. But because no man can demand a right to it, by his own
righteousness, or any other power in himself, but by the free grace of
God only; they say, no man can merit Paradise _ex condigno_. This I say,
I think is the meaning of that distinction; but because disputers do not
agree upon the signification of their own terms of art, longer than it
serves their turn; I will not affirm any thing of their meaning: only
this I say; when a gift is given indefinitely, as a prize to be
contended for, he that winneth meriteth, and may claim the prize as due.

[Sidenote: Covenants of mutual trust, when invalid.]

If a covenant be made, wherein neither of the parties perform presently,
but trust one another; in the condition of mere nature, which is a
condition of war of every man against every man, upon any reasonable
suspicion, it is void: but if there be a common power set over them
both, with right and force sufficient to compel performance, it is not
void. For he that performeth first, has no assurance the other will
perform after; because the bonds of words are too weak to bridle men’s
ambition, avarice, anger, and other passions, without the fear of some
coercive power; which in the condition of mere nature, where all men are
equal, and judges of the justness of their own fears, cannot possibly be
supposed. And therefore he which performeth first, does but betray
himself to his enemy; contrary to the right, he can never abandon, of
defending his life, and means of living.

But in a civil estate, where there is a power set up to constrain those
that would otherwise violate their faith, that fear is no more
reasonable; and for that cause, he which by the covenant is to perform
first, is obliged so to do.

The cause of fear, which maketh such a covenant invalid, must be always
something arising after the covenant made; as some new fact, or other
sign of the will not to perform: else it cannot make the covenant void.
For that which could not hinder a man from promising, ought not to be
admitted as a hindrance of performing.

[Sidenote: Right to the end, containeth right to the means.]

He that transferreth any right, transferreth the means of enjoying it,
as far as lieth in his power. As he that selleth land, is understood to
transfer the herbage, and whatsoever grows upon it: nor can he that
sells a mill turn away the stream that drives it. And they that give to
a man the right of government in sovereignty, are understood to give him
the right of levying money to maintain soldiers; and of appointing
magistrates for the administration of justice.

[Sidenote: No covenant with beasts.]

To make covenants with brute beasts, is impossible; because not
understanding our speech, they understand not, nor accept of any
translation of right; nor can translate any right to another: and
without mutual acceptation, there is no covenant.

[Sidenote: Nor with God without special revelation.]

To make covenant with God, is impossible, but by mediation of such as
God speaketh to, either by revelation supernatural, or by his
lieutenants that govern under him, and in his name: for otherwise we
know not whether our covenants be accepted, or not. And therefore they
that vow anything contrary to any law of nature, vow in vain; as being a
thing unjust to pay such vow. And if it be a thing commanded by the law
of nature, it is not the vow, but the law that binds them.

[Sidenote: No covenant, but of possible and future.]

The matter, or subject of a covenant, is always something that falleth
under deliberation; for to covenant, is an act of the will; that is to
say, an act, and the last act of deliberation; and is therefore always
understood to be something to come; and which is judged possible for him
that covenanteth, to perform.

And therefore, to promise that which is known to be impossible, is no
covenant. But if that prove impossible afterwards, which before was
thought possible, the covenant is valid, and bindeth, though not to the
thing itself, yet to the value; or, if that also be impossible, to the
unfeigned endeavour of performing as much as is possible: for to more no
man can be obliged.

[Sidenote: Covenants how made void.]

Men are freed of their covenants two ways; by performing; or by being
forgiven. For performance, is the natural end of obligation; and
forgiveness, the restitution of liberty; as being a retransferring of
that right, in which the obligation consisted.

[Sidenote: Covenants extorted by fear are valid.]

Covenants entered into by fear, in the condition of mere nature, are
obligatory. For example, if I covenant to pay a ransom, or service for
my life, to an enemy; I am bound by it: for it is a contract, wherein
one receiveth the benefit of life; the other is to receive money, or
service for it; and consequently, where no other law, as in the
condition of mere nature, forbiddeth the performance, the covenant is
valid. Therefore prisoners of war, if trusted with the payment of their
ransom, are obliged to pay it: and if a weaker prince, make a
disadvantageous peace with a stronger, for fear; he is bound to keep it;
unless, as hath been said before, there ariseth some new, and just cause
of fear, to renew the war. And even in commonwealths, if I be forced to
redeem myself from a thief by promising him money, I am bound to pay it,
till the civil law discharge me. For whatsoever I may lawfully do
without obligation, the same I may lawfully covenant to do through fear:
and what I lawfully covenant, I cannot lawfully break.

[Sidenote: The former covenant to one, makes void the later to another.]

A former covenant, makes void a later. For a man that hath passed away
his right to one man to-day, hath it not to pass to-morrow to another:
and therefore the later promise passeth no right, but is null.

[Sidenote: A man’s covenant not to defend himself is void.]

A covenant not to defend myself from force, by force, is always void.
For, as I have showed before, no man can transfer, or lay down his right
to save himself from death, wounds, and imprisonment, the avoiding
whereof is the only end of laying down any right; and therefore the
promise of not resisting force, in no covenant transferreth any right;
nor is obliging. For though a man may covenant thus, _unless I do so, or
so, kill me_; he cannot covenant thus, _unless I do so, or so, I will
not resist you, when you come to kill me_. For man by nature chooseth
the lesser evil, which is danger of death in resisting; rather than the
greater, which is certain and present death in not resisting. And this
is granted to be true by all men, in that they lead criminals to
execution, and prison, with armed men, notwithstanding that such
criminals have consented to the law, by which they are condemned.

[Sidenote: No man obliged to accuse himself.]

A covenant to accuse oneself, without assurance of pardon, is likewise
invalid. For in the condition of nature, where every man is judge, there
is no place for accusation: and in the civil state, the accusation is
followed with punishment; which being force, a man is not obliged not to
resist. The same is also true, of the accusation of those, by whose
condemnation a man falls into misery; as of a father, wife, or
benefactor. For the testimony of such an accuser, if it be not willingly
given, is presumed to be corrupted by nature; and therefore not to be
received: and where a man’s testimony is not to be credited, he is not
bound to give it. Also accusations upon torture, are not to be reputed
as testimonies. For torture is to be used but as means of conjecture,
and light, in the further examination, and search of truth: and what is
in that case confessed, tendeth to the ease of him that is tortured; not
to the informing of the torturers: and therefore ought not to have the
credit of a sufficient testimony: for whether he deliver himself by
true, or false accusation, he does it by the right of preserving his own
life.

[Sidenote: The end of an oath.]

The force of words, being, as I have formerly noted, too weak to hold
men to the performance of their covenants; there are in man’s nature,
but two imaginable helps to strengthen it. And those are either a fear
of the consequence of breaking their word; or a glory, or pride in
appearing not to need to break it. This latter is a generosity too
rarely found to be presumed on, especially in the pursuers of wealth,
command, or sensual pleasure; which are the greatest part of mankind.
The passion to be reckoned upon, is fear; whereof there be two very
general objects: one, the power of spirits invisible; the other, the
power of those men they shall therein offend. Of these two, though the
former be the greater power, yet the fear of the latter is commonly the
greater fear. The fear of the former is in every man, his own religion:
which hath place in the nature of man before civil society. The latter
hath not so; at least not place enough, to keep men to their promises;
because in the condition of mere nature, the inequality of power is not
discerned, but by the event of battle. So that before the time of civil
society, or in the interruption thereof by war, there is nothing can
strengthen a covenant of peace agreed on, against the temptations of
avarice, ambition, lust, or other strong desire, but the fear of that
invisible power, which they every one worship as God; and fear as a
revenger of their perfidy. All therefore that can be done between two
men not subject to civil power, is to put one another to swear by the
God he feareth: [Sidenote: The form of an oath.] which _swearing_, or
OATH, is a _form of speech, added to a promise; by which he that
promiseth, signifieth, that unless he perform, he renounceth the mercy
of his God, or calleth to him for vengeance on himself_. Such was the
heathen form, _Let_ Jupiter _kill me else, as I kill this beast_. So is
our form, _I shall do thus, and thus, so help me God_. And this, with
the rites and ceremonies, which every one useth in his own religion,
that the fear of breaking faith might be the greater.

[Sidenote: No oath but by God.]

By this it appears, that an oath taken according to any other form, or
rite, than his, that sweareth, is in vain; and no oath: and that there
is no swearing by any thing which the swearer thinks not God. For though
men have sometimes used to swear by their kings, for fear, or flattery;
yet they would have it thereby understood, they attributed to them
divine honour. And that swearing unnecessarily by God, is but prophaning
of his name: and swearing by other things, as men do in common
discourse, is not swearing, but an impious custom, gotten by too much
vehemence of talking.

[Sidenote: An oath adds nothing to the obligation.]

It appears also, that the oath adds nothing to the obligation. For a
covenant, if lawful, binds in the sight of God, without the oath, as
much as with it: if unlawful, bindeth not at all; though it be confirmed
with an oath.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XV.

                        OF OTHER LAWS OF NATURE.


[Sidenote: The third law of nature, justice.]

From that law of nature, by which we are obliged to transfer to another,
such rights, as being retained, hinder the peace of mankind, there
followeth a third; which is this, _that men perform their covenants
made_: without which, covenants are in vain, and but empty words; and
the right of all men to all things remaining, we are still in the
condition of war.

[Sidenote: Justice and injustice what.]

And in this law of nature, consisteth the fountain and original of
JUSTICE. For where no covenant hath preceded, there hath no right been
transferred, and every man has right to every thing; and consequently,
no action can be unjust. But when a covenant is made, then to break it
is _unjust_: and the definition of INJUSTICE, is no other than _the not
performance of covenant_. And whatsoever is not unjust, is _just_.

[Sidenote: Justice and propriety begin with the constitution of
           commonwealth.]

But because covenants of mutual trust, where there is a fear of not
performance on either part, as hath been said in the former chapter, are
invalid; though the original of justice be the making of covenants; yet
injustice actually there can be none, till the cause of such fear be
taken away; which while men are in the natural condition of war, cannot
be done. Therefore before the names of just, and unjust can have place,
there must be some coercive power, to compel men equally to the
performance of their covenants, by the terror of some punishment,
greater than the benefit they expect by the breach of their covenant;
and to make good that propriety, which by mutual contract men acquire,
in recompense of the universal right they abandon: and such power there
is none before the erection of a commonwealth. And this is also to be
gathered out of the ordinary definition of justice in the Schools: for
they say, that _justice is the constant will of giving to every man his
own_. And therefore where there is no _own_, that is no propriety, there
is no injustice; and where there is no coercive power erected, that is,
where there is no commonwealth, there is no propriety; all men having
right to all things: therefore where there is no commonwealth, there
nothing is unjust. So that the nature of justice, consisteth in keeping
of valid covenants: but the validity of covenants begins not but with
the constitution of a civil power, sufficient to compel men to keep
them: and then it is also that propriety begins.

[Sidenote: Justice not contrary to reason.]

The fool hath said in his heart, there is no such thing as justice; and
sometimes also with his tongue; seriously alleging, that every man’s
conservation, and contentment, being committed to his own care, there
could be no reason, why every man might not do what he thought conduced
thereunto: and therefore also to make, or not make; keep, or not keep
covenants, was not against reason, when it conduced to one’s benefit. He
does not therein deny, that there be covenants; and that they are
sometimes broken, sometimes kept; and that such breach of them may be
called injustice, and the observance of them justice: but he
questioneth, whether injustice, taking away the fear of God, for the
same fool hath said in his heart there is no God, may not sometimes
stand with that reason, which dictateth to every man his own good; and
particularly then, when it conduceth to such a benefit, as shall put a
man in a condition, to neglect not only the dispraise, and revilings,
but also the power of other men. The kingdom of God is gotten by
violence: but what if it could be gotten by unjust violence? were it
against reason so to get it, when it is impossible to receive hurt by
it? and if it be not against reason, it is not against justice; or else
justice is not to be approved for good. From such reasoning as this,
successful wickedness hath obtained the name of virtue: and some that in
all other things have disallowed the violation of faith; yet have
allowed it, when it is for the getting of a kingdom. And the heathen
that believed, that Saturn was deposed by his son Jupiter, believed
nevertheless the same Jupiter to be the avenger of injustice: somewhat
like to a piece of law in Coke’s _Commentaries on Littleton_; where he
says, if the right heir of the crown be attainted of treason; yet the
crown shall descend to him, and _eo instante_ the attainder be void:
from which instances a man will be very prone to infer; that when the
heir apparent of a kingdom, shall kill him that is in possession, though
his father; you may call it injustice, or by what other name you will;
yet it can never be against reason, seeing all the voluntary actions of
men tend to the benefit of themselves; and those actions are most
reasonable, that conduce most to their ends. This specious reasoning is
nevertheless false.

For the question is not of promises mutual, where there is no security
of performance on either side; as when there is no civil power erected
over the parties promising; for such promises are no covenants: but
either where one of the parties has performed already; or where there is
a power to make him perform; there is the question whether it be against
reason, that is, against the benefit of the other to perform, or not.
And I say it is not against reason. For the manifestation whereof, we
are to consider; first, that when a man doth a thing, which
notwithstanding any thing can be foreseen, and reckoned on, tendeth to
his own destruction, howsoever some accident which he could not expect,
arriving may turn it to his benefit; yet such events do not make it
reasonably or wisely done. Secondly, that in a condition of war, wherein
every man to every man, for want of a common power to keep them all in
awe, is an enemy, there is no man who can hope by his own strength, or
wit, to defend himself from destruction, without the help of
confederates; where every one expects the same defence by the
confederation, that any one else does: and therefore he which declares
he thinks it reason to deceive those that help him, can in reason expect
no other means of safety, than what can be had from his own single
power. He therefore that breaketh his covenant, and consequently
declareth that he thinks he may with reason do so, cannot be received
into any society, that unite themselves for peace and defence, but by
the error of them that receive him; nor when he is received, be retained
in it, without seeing the danger of their error; which errors a man
cannot reasonably reckon upon as the means of his security: and
therefore if he be left, or cast out of society, he perisheth; and if he
live in society, it is by the errors of other men, which he could not
foresee, nor reckon upon; and consequently against the reason of his
preservation; and so, as all men that contribute not to his destruction,
forbear him only out of ignorance of what is good for themselves.

As for the instance of gaining the secure and perpetual felicity of
heaven, by any way; it is frivolous: there being but one way imaginable;
and that is not breaking, but keeping of covenant.

And for the other instance of attaining sovereignty by rebellion; it is
manifest, that though the event follow, yet because it cannot reasonably
be expected, but rather the contrary; and because by gaining it so,
others are taught to gain the same in like manner, the attempt thereof
is against reason. Justice therefore, that is to say, keeping of
covenant, is a rule of reason, by which we are forbidden to do any thing
destructive to our life; and consequently a law of nature.

There be some that proceed further; and will not have the law of nature,
to be those rules which conduce to the preservation of man’s life on
earth; but to the attaining of an eternal felicity after death; to which
they think the breach of covenant may conduce; and consequently be just
and reasonable; such are they that think it a work of merit to kill, or
depose, or rebel against, the sovereign power constituted over them by
their own consent. But because there is no natural knowledge of man’s
estate after death; much less of the reward that is then to be given to
breach of faith; but only a belief grounded upon other men’s saying,
that they know it supernaturally, or that they know those, that knew
them, that knew others, that knew it supernaturally; breach of faith
cannot be called a precept of reason, or nature.

[Sidenote: Covenants not discharged by the vice of the person to whom
           they are made.]

Others, that allow for a law of nature, the keeping of faith, do
nevertheless make exception of certain persons; as heretics, and such as
use not to perform their covenant to others: and this also is against
reason. For if any fault of a man, be sufficient to discharge our
covenant made; the same ought in reason to have been sufficient to have
hindered the making of it.

[Sidenote: Justice of men and justice of actions what.]

The names of just, and injust, when they are attributed to men, signify
one thing; and when they are attributed to actions, another. When they
are attributed to men, they signify conformity, or inconformity of
manners, to reason. But when they are attributed to actions, they
signify the conformity, or inconformity to reason, not of manners, or
manner of life, but of particular actions. A just man therefore, is he
that taketh all the care he can, that his actions may be all just: and
an unjust man, is he that neglecteth it. And such men are more often in
our language styled by the names of righteous, and unrighteous; than
just, and unjust; though the meaning be the same. Therefore a righteous
man, does not lose that title, by one, or a few unjust actions, that
proceed from sudden passion, or mistake of things, or persons: nor does
an unrighteous man, lose his character, for such actions, as he does, or
forbears to do, for fear; because his will is not framed by the justice,
but by the apparent benefit of what he is to do. That which gives to
human actions the relish of justice, is a certain nobleness or
gallantness of courage, rarely found, by which a man scorns to be
beholden for the contentment of his life, to fraud, or breach of
promise. This justice of the manners, is that which is meant, where
justice is called a virtue; and injustice a vice.

But the justice of actions denominates men, not just, but _guiltless_:
and the injustice of the same, which is also called injury, gives them
but the name of _guilty_.

[Sidenote: Justice of manners, and justice of actions.]

Again, the injustice of manners, is the disposition, or aptitude to do
injury; and is injustice before it proceed to act; and without supposing
any individual person injured. But the injustice of an action, that is
to say injury, supposeth an individual person injured; namely him, to
whom the covenant was made: and therefore many times the injury is
received by one man, when the damage redoundeth to another. As when the
master commandeth his servant to give money to a stranger; if it be not
done, the injury is done to the master, whom he had before covenanted to
obey; but the damage redoundeth to the stranger, to whom he had no
obligation; and therefore could not injure him. And so also in
commonwealths, private men may remit to one another their debts; but not
robberies or other violences, whereby they are endamaged; because the
detaining of debt, is an injury to themselves; but robbery and violence,
are injuries to the person of the commonwealth.

[Sidenote: Nothing done to a man by his own consent can be injury.]

Whatsoever is done to a man, conformable to his own will signified to
the doer, is no injury to him. For if he that doeth it, hath not passed
away his original right to do what he please, by some antecedent
covenant, there is no breach of covenant; and therefore no injury done
him. And if he have; then his will to have it done being signified, is a
release of that covenant: and so again there is no injury done him.

[Sidenote: Justice commutative and distributive.]

Justice of actions, is by writers divided into _commutative_, and
_distributive_: and the former they say consisteth in proportion
arithmetical; the latter in proportion geometrical. Commutative
therefore, they place in the equality of value of the things contracted
for; and distributive, in the distribution of equal benefit, to men of
equal merit. As if it were injustice to sell dearer than we buy; or to
give more to a man than he merits. The value of all things contracted
for, is measured by the appetite of the contractors: and therefore the
just value, is that which they be contented to give. And merit, besides
that which is by covenant, where the performance on one part, meriteth
the performance of the other part, and falls under justice commutative,
not distributive, is not due by justice; but is rewarded of grace only.
And therefore this distinction, in the sense wherein it useth to be
expounded, is not right. To speak properly, commutative justice, is the
justice, of a contractor; that is, a performance of covenant, in buying,
and selling; hiring, and letting to hire; lending, and borrowing;
exchanging, bartering, and other acts of contract.

And distributive justice, the justice of an arbitrator; that is to say,
the act of defining what is just. Wherein, being trusted by them that
make him arbitrator, if he perform his trust, he is said to distribute
to every man his own: and this is indeed just distribution, and may be
called, though improperly, distributive justice; but more properly
equity; which also is a law of nature, as shall be shown in due place.

[Sidenote: The fourth law of nature, gratitude.]

As justice dependeth on antecedent covenant; so does GRATITUDE depend on
antecedent grace; that is to say, antecedent free gift: and is the
fourth law of nature; which may be conceived in this form, _that a man
which receiveth benefit from another of mere grace, endeavour that he
which giveth it, have no reasonable cause to repent him of his good
will_. For no man giveth, but with intention of good to himself; because
gift is voluntary; and of all voluntary acts, the object is to every man
his own good; of which if men see they shall be frustrated, there will
be no beginning of benevolence, or trust; nor consequently of mutual
help; nor of reconciliation of one man to another; and therefore they
are to remain still in the condition of _war_; which is contrary to the
first and fundamental law of nature, which commandeth men to _seek
peace_. The breach of this law, is called _ingratitude_; and hath the
same relation to grace, that injustice hath to obligation by covenant.

[Sidenote: The fifth mutual accommodation, or complaisance.]

A fifth law of nature, is COMPLAISANCE; that is to say, _that every man
strive to accommodate himself to the rest_. For the understanding
whereof, we may consider, that there is in men’s aptness to society, a
diversity of nature, rising from their diversity of affections; not
unlike to that we see in stones brought together for building of an
edifice. For as that stone which by the asperity, and irregularity of
figure, takes more room from others, than itself fills; and for the
hardness, cannot be easily made plain, and thereby hindereth the
building, is by the builders cast away as unprofitable, and troublesome:
so also, a man that by asperity of nature, will strive to retain those
things which to himself are superfluous, and to others necessary; and
for the stubbornness of his passions, cannot be corrected, is to be
left, or cast out of society, as cumbersome thereunto. For seeing every
man, not only by right, but also by necessity of nature, is supposed to
endeavour all he can, to obtain that which is necessary for his
conservation; he that shall oppose himself against it, for things
superfluous, is guilty of the war that thereupon is to follow; and
therefore doth that, which is contrary to the fundamental law of nature,
which commandeth _to seek peace_. The observers of this law, may be
called SOCIABLE, the Latins call them _commodi_; the contrary,
_stubborn_, _insociable_, _froward_, _intractable_.

[Sidenote: The sixth, facility to pardon.]

A sixth law of nature, is this, _that upon caution of the future time, a
man ought to pardon the offences past of them that repenting, desire
it_. For PARDON, is nothing but granting of peace; which though granted
to them that persevere in their hostility, be not peace, but fear; yet
not granted to them that give caution of the future time, is sign of an
aversion to peace; and therefore contrary to the law of nature.

[Sidenote: The seventh, that in revenges, men respect only the future
           good.]

A seventh is, _that in revenges_, that is, retribution of evil for evil,
_men look not at the greatness of the evil past, but the greatness of
the good to follow_. Whereby we are forbidden to inflict punishment with
any other design, than for correction of the offender, or direction of
others. For this law is consequent to the next before it, that
commandeth pardon, upon security of the future time. Besides, revenge
without respect to the example, and profit to come, is a triumph, or
glorying in the hurt of another, tending to no end; for the end is
always somewhat to come; and glorying to no end, is vain-glory, and
contrary to reason, and to hurt without reason, tendeth to the
introduction of war; which is against the law of nature; and is commonly
styled by the name of _cruelty_.

[Sidenote: The eighth, against contumely.]

And because all signs of hatred, or contempt, provoke to fight; insomuch
as most men choose rather to hazard their life, than not to be revenged;
we may in the eighth place, for a law of nature, set down this precept,
_that no man by deed, word, countenance, or gesture, declare hatred, or
contempt of another_. The breach of which law, is commonly called
_contumely_.

[Sidenote: The ninth, against pride.]

The question who is the better man, has no place in the condition of
mere nature; where, as has been shewn before, all men are equal. The
inequality that now is, has been introduced by the laws civil. I know
that Aristotle in the first book of his _Politics_, for a foundation of
his doctrine, maketh men by nature, some more worthy to command, meaning
the wiser sort, such as he thought himself to be for his philosophy;
others to serve, meaning those that had strong bodies, but were not
philosophers as he; as if master and servant were not introduced by
consent of men, but by difference of wit: which is not only against
reason; but also against experience. For there are very few so foolish,
that had not rather govern themselves, than be governed by others: nor
when the wise in their own conceit, contend by force, with them who
distrust their own wisdom, do they always, or often, or almost at any
time, get the victory. If nature therefore have made men equal, that
equality is to be acknowledged: or if nature have made men unequal; yet
because men that think themselves equal, will not enter into conditions
of peace, but upon equal terms, such equality must be admitted. And
therefore for the ninth law of nature, I put this, _that every man
acknowledge another for his equal by nature_. The breach of this precept
is _pride_.

[Sidenote: The tenth, against arrogance.]

On this law, dependeth another, _that at the entrance into conditions of
peace_, _no man require to reserve to himself any right_, _which he is
not content should be reserved to every one of the rest_. As it is
necessary for all men that seek peace, to lay down certain rights of
nature; that is to say, not to have liberty to do all they list: so is
it necessary for man’s life, to retain some; as right to govern their
own bodies; enjoy air, water, motion, ways to go from place to place;
and all things else, without which a man cannot live, or not live well.
If in this case, at the making of peace, men require for themselves,
that which they would not have to be granted to others, they do contrary
to the precedent law, that commandeth the acknowledgment of natural
equality, and therefore also against the law of nature. The observers of
this law, are those we call _modest_, and the breakers _arrogant_ men.
The Greeks call the violation of this law πλεονεξία; that is, a desire
of more than their share.

[Sidenote: The eleventh, equity.]

Also if _a man be trusted to judge between man and man_, it is a precept
of the law of nature, _that he deal equally between them_. For without
that, the controversies of men cannot be determined but by war. He
therefore that is partial in judgment, doth what in him lies, to deter
men from the use of judges, and arbitrators; and consequently, against
the fundamental law of nature, is the cause of war.

The observance of this law, from the equal distribution to each man, of
that which in reason belongeth to him, is called EQUITY, and, as I have
said before, distributive justice: the violation, _acception of
persons_, προσωποληψία.

[Sidenote: The twelfth, equal use of things common.]

And from this followeth another law, _that such things as cannot be
divided, be enjoyed in common, if it can be; and if the quantity of the
thing permit, without stint; otherwise proportionably to the number of
them that have right_. For otherwise the distribution is unequal, and
contrary to equity.

[Sidenote: The thirteenth, of lot.]

But some things there be, that can neither be divided, nor enjoyed in
common. Then, the law of nature, which prescribeth equity, requireth,
_that the entire right; or else, making the use alternate, the first
possession, be determined by lot_. For equal distribution, is of the law
of nature; and other means of equal distribution cannot be imagined.

[Sidenote: The fourteenth, of primogeniture, and first seizing.]

Of _lots_ there be two sorts, _arbitrary_, and _natural_. Arbitrary, is
that which is agreed on by the competitors: natural, is either
_primogeniture_, which the Greek calls κληρονομία, which signifies,
_given by lot_; or _first seizure_.

And therefore those things which cannot be enjoyed in common, nor
divided, ought to be adjudged to the first possessor; and in some cases
to the first born, as acquired by lot.

[Sidenote: The fifteenth, of mediators.]

It is also a law of nature, _that all men that mediate peace, be allowed
safe conduct_. For the law that commandeth peace, as the _end_,
commandeth intercession, as the _means_; and to intercession the means
is safe conduct.

[Illustration: The sixteenth, of submission to arbitrement.]

And because, though men be never so willing to observe these laws, there
may nevertheless arise questions concerning a man’s action; first,
whether it were done, or not done; secondly, if done, whether against
the law, or not against the law; the former whereof, is called a
question _of fact_; the latter a question _of right_, therefore unless
the parties to the question, covenant mutually to stand to the sentence
of another, they are as far from peace as ever. This other to whose
sentence they submit is called an ARBITRATOR. And therefore it is of the
law of nature, _that they that are at controversy, submit their right to
the judgment of an arbitrator_.

[Sidenote: The seventeenth, no man is his own judge.]

And seeing every man is presumed to do all things in order to his own
benefit, no man is a fit arbitrator in his own cause; and if he were
never so fit; yet equity allowing to each party equal benefit, if one be
admitted to be judge, the other is to be admitted also; and so the
controversy, that is, the cause of war, remains, against the law of
nature.

[Sidenote: The eighteenth, no man to be judge, that has in him a natural
           cause of partiality.]

For the same reason no man in any cause ought to be received for
arbitrator, to whom greater profit, or honour, or pleasure apparently
ariseth out of the victory of one party, than of the other: for he hath
taken, though an unavoidable bribe, yet a bribe; and no man can be
obliged to trust him. And thus also the controversy, and the condition
of war remaineth, contrary to the law of nature.

[Sidenote: The nineteenth of witnesses.]

And in a controversy of _fact_, the judge being to give no more credit
to one, than to the other, if there be no other arguments, must give
credit to a third; or to a third and fourth; or more: for else the
question is undecided, and left to force, contrary to the law of nature.

These are the laws of nature, dictating peace, for a means of the
conservation of men in multitudes; and which only concern the doctrine
of civil society. There be other things tending to the destruction of
particular men; as drunkenness, and all other parts of intemperance;
which may therefore also be reckoned amongst those things which the law
of nature hath forbidden; but are not necessary to be mentioned, nor are
pertinent enough to this place.

[Sidenote: A rule, by which the laws of nature may easily be examined.]

And though this may seem too subtle a deduction of the laws of nature,
to be taken notice of by all men; whereof the most part are too busy in
getting food, and the rest too negligent to understand; yet to leave all
men inexcusable, they have been contracted into one easy sum,
intelligible even to the meanest capacity; and that is, _Do not that to
another, which thou wouldest not have done to thyself_; which sheweth
him, that he has no more to do in learning the laws of nature, but, when
weighing the actions of other men with his own, they seem too heavy, to
put them into the other part of the balance, and his own into their
place, that his own passions, and self-love, may add nothing to the
weight; and then there is none of these laws of nature that will not
appear unto him very reasonable.

[Sidenote: The laws of nature oblige in conscience always, but in effect
           then only when there is security.]

The laws of nature oblige _in foro interno_; that is to say, they bind
to a desire they should take place: but _in foro externo_; that is, to
the putting them in act, not always. For he that should be modest, and
tractable, and perform all he promises, in such time, and place, where
no man else should do so, should but make himself a prey to others, and
procure his own certain ruin, contrary to the ground of all laws of
nature, which tend to nature’s preservation. And again, he that having
sufficient security, that others shall observe the same laws towards
him, observes them not himself, seeketh not peace, but war; and
consequently the destruction of his nature by violence.

And whatsoever laws bind _in foro interno_, may be broken, not only by a
fact contrary to the law, but also by a fact according to it, in case a
man think it contrary. For though his action in this case, be according
to the law; yet his purpose was against the law; which, where the
obligation is _in foro interno_, is a breach.

[Sidenote: The laws of nature are eternal.]

The laws of nature are immutable and eternal; for injustice,
ingratitude, arrogance, pride, iniquity, acception of persons, and the
rest, can never be made lawful. For it can never be that war shall
preserve life, and peace destroy it.

[Sidenote: And yet easy.]

The same laws, because they oblige only to a desire, and endeavour, I
mean an unfeigned and constant endeavour, are easy to be observed. For
in that they require nothing but endeavour, he that endeavoureth their
performance, fulfilleth them; and he that fulfilleth the law, is just.

[Sidenote: The science of these laws, is the true moral philosophy.]

And the science of them, is the true and only moral philosophy. For
moral philosophy is nothing else but the science of what is _good_, and
_evil_, in the conversation, and society of mankind. _Good_, and _evil_,
are names that signify our appetites, and aversions; which in different
tempers, customs, and doctrines of men, are different: and divers men,
differ not only in their judgment, on the senses of what is pleasant,
and unpleasant to the taste, smell, hearing, touch, and sight; but also
of what is conformable, or disagreeable to reason, in the actions of
common life. Nay, the same man, in divers times, differs from himself;
and one time praiseth, that is, calleth good, what another time he
dispraiseth, and calleth evil: from whence arise disputes,
controversies, and at last war. And therefore so long as a man is in the
condition of mere nature, which is a condition of war, as private
appetite is the measure of good, and evil: and consequently all men
agree on this, that peace is good, and therefore also the way, or means
of peace, which, as I have shewed before, are _justice_, _gratitude_,
_modesty_, _equity_, _mercy_, and the rest of the laws of nature, are
good; that is to say; _moral virtues_; and their contrary _vices_, evil.
Now the science of virtue and vice, is moral philosophy; and therefore
the true doctrine of the laws of nature, is the true moral philosophy.
But the writers of moral philosophy, though they acknowledge the same
virtues and vices; yet not seeing wherein consisted their goodness; nor
that they come to be praised, as the means of peaceable, sociable, and
comfortable living, place them in a mediocrity of passions: as if not
the cause, but the degree of daring, made fortitude; or not the cause,
but the quantity of a gift, made liberality.

These dictates of reason, men used to call by the name of laws, but
improperly: for they are but conclusions, or theorems concerning what
conduceth to the conservation and defence of themselves; whereas law,
properly, is the word of him, that by right hath command over others.
But yet if we consider the same theorems, as delivered in the word of
God, that by right commandeth all things; then are they properly called
laws.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XVI.

                    OF PERSONS, AUTHORS, AND THINGS
                              PERSONATED.


[Sidenote: A person what.]

A PERSON, is he, _whose words or actions are considered, either as his
own, or as representing the words or actions of another man, or of any
other thing, to whom they are attributed, whether truly or by fiction_.

[Sidenote: Person natural, and artificial.]

When they are considered as his own, then is he called a _natural
person_: and when they are considered as representing the words and
actions of another, then is he a _feigned_ or _artificial person_.

[Sidenote: The word person, whence.]

The word person is Latin: instead whereof the Greeks have πρόσωπον,
which signifies the _face_, as _persona_ in Latin signifies the
disguise, or _outward appearance_ of a man, counterfeited on the stage;
and sometimes more particularly that part of it, which disguiseth the
face, as a mask or vizard: and from the stage, hath been translated to
any representer of speech and action, as well in tribunals, as theatres.
So that a _person_, is the same that an _actor_ is, both on the stage
and in common conversation; and to _personate_, is to _act_, or
_represent_ himself, or another; and he that acteth another, is said to
bear his person, or act in his name; in which sense Cicero useth it
where he says, _Unus sustineo tres personas; mei, adversarii, et
judicis_: I bear three persons; my own, my adversary’s, and the judge’s;
and is called in divers occasions, diversly; as a _representer_, or
_representative_, a _lieutenant_, a _vicar_, an _attorney_, a _deputy_,
a _procurator_, an _actor_, and the like.

Of persons artificial, some have their words and actions _owned_ by
those whom they represent. [Sidenote: Actor.] And then the person is the
_actor_; [Sidenote: Author.] and he that owneth his words and actions,
is the AUTHOR: in which case the actor acteth by authority. For that
which in speaking of goods and possessions, is called an _owner_, and in
Latin _dominus_, in Greek κύριος speaking of actions, is called author.
And as the right of possession, is called dominion; [Sidenote:
Authority.] so the right of doing any action, is called AUTHORITY. So
that by authority, is always understood a right of doing any act; and
_done by authority_, done by commission, or licence from him whose right
it is.

[Sidenote: Covenants by authority, bind the author.]

From hence it followeth, that when the actor maketh a covenant by
authority, he bindeth thereby the author, no less than if he had made it
himself; and no less subjecteth him to all the consequences of the same.
And therefore all that hath been said formerly, (chap. XIV) of the
nature of covenants between man and man in their natural capacity, is
true also when they are made by their actors, representers, or
procurators, that have authority from them, so far forth as is in their
commission, but no further.

And therefore he that maketh a covenant with the actor, or representer,
not knowing the authority he hath, doth it at his own peril. For no man
is obliged by a covenant, whereof he is not author; nor consequently by
a covenant made against, or beside the authority he gave.

[Sidenote: But not the actor.]

When the actor doth anything against the law of nature by command of the
author, if he be obliged by former covenant to obey him, not he, but the
author breaketh the law of nature; for though the action be against the
law of nature; yet it is not his: but contrarily, to refuse to do it, is
against the law of nature, that forbiddeth breach of covenant.

[Sidenote: The authority is to be shown.]

And he that maketh a covenant with the author, by mediation of the
actor, not knowing what authority he hath, but only takes his word; in
case such authority be not made manifest unto him upon demand, is no
longer obliged: for the covenant made with the author, is not valid,
without his counter-assurance. But if he that so covenanteth, knew
beforehand he was to expect no other assurance, than the actor’s word;
then is the covenant valid; because the actor in this case maketh
himself the author. And therefore, as when the authority is evident, the
covenant obligeth the author, not the actor; so when the authority is
feigned, it obligeth the actor only; there being no author but himself.

[Sidenote: Things personated, inanimate.]

There are few things, that are incapable of being represented by
fiction. Inanimate things, as a church, an hospital, a bridge, may be
personated by a rector, master, or overseer. But things inanimate,
cannot be authors, nor therefore give authority to their actors: yet the
actors may have authority to procure their maintenance, given them by
those that are owners, or governors of those things. And therefore, such
things cannot be personated, before there be some state of civil
government.

[Sidenote: Irrational.]

Likewise children, fools, and madmen that have no use of reason, may be
personated by guardians, or curators; but can be no authors, during that
time, of any action done by them, longer than, when they shall recover
the use of reason, they shall judge the same reasonable. Yet during the
folly, he that hath right of governing them, may give authority to the
guardian. But this again has no place but in a state civil, because
before such estate, there is no dominion of persons.

[Sidenote: False gods.]

An idol, or mere figment of the brain, may be personated; as were the
gods of the heathen: which by such officers as the state appointed, were
personated, and held possessions, and other goods, and rights, which men
from time to time dedicated, and consecrated unto them. But idols cannot
be authors: for an idol is nothing. The authority proceeded from the
state: and therefore before introduction of civil government, the gods
of the heathen could not be personated.

[Sidenote: The true God.]

The true God may be personated. As he was; first, by Moses; who governed
the Israelites, that were not his, but God’s people, not in his own
name, with _hoc dicit Moses_; but in God’s name, with _hoc dicit
Dominus_. Secondly, by the Son of man, his own Son, our blessed Saviour
Jesus Christ, that came to reduce the Jews, and induce all nations into
the kingdom of his father; not as of himself, but as sent from his
father. And thirdly, by the Holy Ghost, or Comforter, speaking, and
working in the Apostles: which Holy Ghost, was a Comforter that came not
of himself; but was sent, and proceeded from them both.

[Sidenote: A multitude of men, how one person.]

A multitude of men, are made one person, when they are by one man, or
one person, represented; so that it be done with the consent of every
one of that multitude in particular. For it is the _unity_ of the
representer, not the _unity_ of the represented, that maketh the person
_one_. And it is the representer that beareth the person, and but one
person: and _unity_, cannot otherwise be understood in multitude.

[Sidenote: Every one is author.]

And because the multitude naturally is not _one_, but _many_; they
cannot be understood for one; but many authors, of every thing their
representative saith, or doth in their name; every man giving their
common representer, authority from himself in particular; and owning all
the actions the representer doth, in case they give him authority
without stint: otherwise, when they limit him in what, and how far he
shall represent them, none of them owneth more than they gave him
commission to act.

[Sidenote: An actor may be many men made one by plurality of voices.]

And if the representative consist of many men, the voice of the greater
number, must be considered as the voice of them all. For if the lesser
number pronounce, for example, in the affirmative, and the greater in
the negative, there will be negatives more than enough to destroy the
affirmatives; and thereby the excess of negatives, standing
uncontradicted, are the only voice the representative hath.

[Sidenote: Representatives, when the number is even, unprofitable.]

And a representative of even number, especially when the number is not
great, whereby the contradictory voices are oftentimes equal, is
therefore oftentimes mute, and incapable of action. Yet in some cases
contradictory voices equal in number, may determine a question; as in
condemning, or absolving, equality of votes, even in that they condemn
not, do absolve; but not on the contrary condemn, in that they absolve
not. For when a cause is heard; not to condemn, is to absolve: but on
the contrary, to say that not absolving, is condemning, is not true. The
like it is in a deliberation of executing presently, or deferring till
another time: for when the voices are equal, the not decreeing
execution, is a decree of dilation.

[Sidenote: Negative voice.]

Or if the number be odd, as three, or more, men or assemblies; whereof
every one has by a negative voice, authority to take away the effect of
all the affirmative voices of the rest, this number is no
representative; because by the diversity of opinions, and interests of
men, it becomes oftentimes, and in cases of the greatest consequence, a
mute person, and unapt, as for many things else, so for the government
of a multitude, especially in time of war.

Of authors there be two sorts. The first simply so called; which I have
before defined to be him, that owneth the action of another simply. The
second is he, that owneth an action, or covenant of another
conditionally; that is to say, he undertaketh to do it, if the other
doth it not, at, or before a certain time. And these authors
conditional, are generally called SURETIES, in Latin, _fidejussores_,
and _sponsores_; and particularly for debt, _prædes_; and for appearance
before a judge, or magistrate, _vades_.




                                PART II.

                            OF COMMONWEALTH.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XVII.

               OF THE CAUSES, GENERATION, AND DEFINITION
                           OF A COMMONWEALTH.


[Sidenote: The end of commonwealth, particular security:]

The final cause, end, or design of men, who naturally love liberty, and
dominion over others, in the introduction of that restraint upon
themselves, in which we see them live in commonwealths, is the foresight
of their own preservation, and of a more contented life thereby; that is
to say, of getting themselves out from that miserable condition of war,
which is necessarily consequent, as hath been shown in chapter XIII, to
the natural passions of men, when there is no visible power to keep them
in awe, and tie them by fear of punishment to the performance of their
covenants, and observation of those laws of nature set down in the
fourteenth and fifteenth chapters.

[Sidenote: Which is not to be had from the law of nature:]

For the laws of nature, as _justice_, _equity_, _modesty_, _mercy_, and,
in sum, _doing to others, as we would be done to_, of themselves,
without the terror of some power, to cause them to be observed, are
contrary to our natural passions, that carry us to partiality, pride,
revenge, and the like. And covenants, without the sword, are but words,
and of no strength to secure a man at all. Therefore notwithstanding the
laws of nature, which every one hath then kept, when he has the will to
keep them, when he can do it safely, if there be no power erected, or
not great enough for our security; every man will, and may lawfully rely
on his own strength and art, for caution against all other men. And in
all places, where men have lived by small families, to rob and spoil one
another, has been a trade, and so far from being reputed against the law
of nature, that the greater spoils they gained, the greater was their
honour; and men observed no other laws therein, but the laws of honour;
that is, to abstain from cruelty, leaving to men their lives, and
instruments of husbandry. And as small families did then; so now do
cities and kingdoms which are but greater families, for their own
security, enlarge their dominions, upon all pretences of danger, and
fear of invasion, or assistance that may be given to invaders, and
endeavour as much as they can, to subdue, or weaken their neighbours, by
open force, and secret arts, for want of other caution, justly; and are
remembered for it in after ages with honour.

[Sidenote: Nor from the conjunction of a few men or families:]

Nor is it the joining together of a small number of men, that gives them
this security; because in small numbers, small additions on the one side
or the other, make the advantage of strength so great, as is sufficient
to carry the victory; and therefore gives encouragement to an invasion.
The multitude sufficient to confide in for our security, is not
determined by any certain number, but by comparison with the enemy we
fear; and is then sufficient, when the odds of the enemy is not of so
visible and conspicuous moment, to determine the event of war, as to
move him to attempt.

[Sidenote: Nor from a great multitude, unless directed by one judgment:]

And be there never so great a multitude; yet if their actions be
directed according to their particular judgments, and particular
appetites, they can expect thereby no defence, nor protection, neither
against a common enemy, nor against the injuries of one another. For
being distracted in opinions concerning the best use and application of
their strength, they do not help but hinder one another; and reduce
their strength by mutual opposition to nothing: whereby they are easily,
not only subdued by a very few that agree together; but also when there
is no common enemy, they make war upon each other, for their particular
interests. For if we could suppose a great multitude of men to consent
in the observation of justice, and other laws of nature, without a
common power to keep them all in awe; we might as well suppose all
mankind to do the same; and then there neither would be, nor need to be
any civil government, or Commonwealth at all; because there would be
peace without subjection.

[Sidenote: And that continually.]

Nor is it enough for the security, which men desire should last all the
time of their life, that they be governed, and directed by one judgment,
for a limited time; as in one battle, or one war. For though they obtain
a victory by their unanimous endeavour against a foreign enemy; yet
afterwards, when either they have no common enemy, or he that by one
part is held for an enemy, is by another part held for a friend, they
must needs by the difference of their interests dissolve, and fall again
into a war amongst themselves.

[Sidenote: Why certain creatures without reason, or speech, do
           nevertheless live in society, without any coercive power.]

It is true, that certain living creatures, as bees, and ants, live
sociably one with another, which are therefore by Aristotle numbered
amongst political creatures; and yet have no other direction, than their
particular judgments and appetites; nor speech, whereby one of them can
signify to another, what he thinks expedient for the common benefit: and
therefore some man may perhaps desire to know, why mankind cannot do the
same. To which I answer,

First, that men are continually in competition for honour and dignity,
which these creatures are not; and consequently amongst men there
ariseth on that ground, envy and hatred, and finally war; but amongst
these not so.

Secondly, that amongst these creatures, the common good differeth not
from the private; and being by nature inclined to their private, they
procure thereby the common benefit. But man, whose joy consisteth in
comparing himself with other men, can relish nothing but what is
eminent.

Thirdly, that these creatures, having not, as man, the use of reason, do
not see, nor think they see any fault, in the administration of their
common business; whereas amongst men, there are very many, that think
themselves wiser, and abler to govern the public, better than the rest;
and these strive to reform and innovate, one this way, another that way;
and thereby bring it into distraction and civil war.

Fourthly, that these creatures, though they have some use of voice, in
making known to one another their desires, and other affections; yet
they want that art of words, by which some men can represent to others,
that which is good, in the likeness of evil; and evil, in the likeness
of good; and augment, or diminish the apparent greatness of good and
evil; discontenting men, and troubling their peace at their pleasure.

Fifthly, irrational creatures cannot distinguish between _injury_ and
_damage_; and therefore as long as they be at ease, they are not
offended with their fellows: whereas man is then most troublesome, when
he is most at ease: for then it is that he loves to shew his wisdom, and
control the actions of them that govern the commonwealth.

Lastly, the agreement of these creatures is natural; that of men, is by
covenant only, which is artificial: and therefore it is no wonder if
there be somewhat else required, besides covenant, to make their
agreement constant and lasting; which is a common power, to keep them in
awe, and to direct their actions to the common benefit.

[Sidenote: The generation of a commonwealth.]

The only way to erect such a common power, as may be able to defend them
from the invasion of foreigners, and the injuries of one another, and
thereby to secure them in such sort, as that by their own industry, and
by the fruits of the earth, they may nourish themselves and live
contentedly; is, to confer all their power and strength upon one man, or
upon one assembly of men, that may reduce all their wills, by plurality
of voices, unto one will: which is as much as to say, to appoint one
man, or assembly of men, to bear their person; and every one to own, and
acknowledge himself to be author of whatsoever he that so beareth their
person, shall act, or cause to be acted, in those things which concern
the common peace and safety; and therein to submit their wills, every
one to his will, and their judgments, to his judgment. This is more than
consent, or concord; it is a real unity of them all, in one and the same
person, made by covenant of every man with every man, in such manner, as
if every man should say to every man, _I authorise and give up my right
of governing myself, to this man, or to this assembly of men, on this
condition, that thou give up thy right to him, and authorize all his
actions in like manner_. This done, the multitude so united in one
person, is called a COMMONWEALTH, in Latin CIVITAS. This is the
generation of that great LEVIATHAN, or rather, to speak more reverently,
of that _mortal god_, to which we owe under the _immortal God_, our
peace and defence. For by this authority, given him by every particular
man in the commonwealth, he hath the use of so much power and strength
conferred on him, that by terror thereof, he is enabled to perform the
wills of them all, to peace at home, and mutual aid against their
enemies abroad. [Sidenote: The definition of a commonwealth.] And in him
consisteth the essence of the commonwealth; which, to define it, is _one
person, of whose acts a great multitude, by mutual covenants one with
another, have made themselves every one the author, to the end he may
use the strength and means of them all, as he shall think expedient, for
their peace and common defence_.

[Sidenote: Sovereign, and subject, what.]

And he that carrieth this person, is called SOVEREIGN, and said to have
_sovereign power_; and every one besides, his SUBJECT.

The attaining to this sovereign power, is by two ways. One, by natural
force; as when a man maketh his children, to submit themselves, and
their children to his government, as being able to destroy them if they
refuse; or by war subdueth his enemies to his will, giving them their
lives on that condition. The other, is when men agree amongst
themselves, to submit to some man, or assembly of men, voluntarily, on
confidence to be protected by him against all others. This latter, may
be called a political commonwealth, or commonwealth by _institution_;
and the former, a commonwealth by _acquisition_. And first, I shall
speak of a commonwealth by institution.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XVIII.

              OF THE RIGHTS OF SOVEREIGNS BY INSTITUTION.


[Sidenote: The act of instituting a commonwealth, what.]

A _commonwealth_ is said to be _instituted_, when a _multitude_ of men
do agree; and _covenant, every one, with every one_, that to whatsoever
_man_, or _assembly of men_, shall be given by the major part, the
_right_ to _present_ the person of them all, that is to say, to be their
_representative_; every one, as well he that _voted for it_, as he that
_voted against it_, shall _authorize_ all the actions and judgments, of
that man, or assembly of men, in the same manner, as if they were his
own, to the end, to live peaceably amongst themselves, and be protected
against other men.

[Sidenote: The consequences to such institution, are.]

From this institution of a commonwealth are derived all the _rights_,
and _faculties_ of him, or them, on whom sovereign power is conferred by
the consent of the people assembled.

[Sidenote: 1. The subjects cannot change the form of government.]

First, because they covenant, it is to be understood, they are not
obliged by former covenant to anything repugnant hereunto. And
consequently they that have already instituted a commonwealth, being
thereby bound by covenant, to own the actions, and judgments of one,
cannot lawfully make a new covenant, amongst themselves, to be obedient
to any other, in any thing whatsoever, without his permission. And
therefore, they that are subjects to a monarch, cannot without his leave
cast off monarchy, and return to the confusion of a disunited multitude;
nor transfer their person from him that beareth it, to another man, or
other assembly of men: for they are bound, every man to every man, to
own, and be reputed author of all, that he that already is their
sovereign, shall do, and judge fit to be done: so that any one man
dissenting, all the rest should break their covenant made to that man,
which is injustice: and they have also every man given the sovereignty
to him that beareth their person; and therefore if they depose him, they
take from him that which is his own, and so again it is injustice.
Besides, if he that attempteth to depose his sovereign, be killed, or
punished by him for such attempt, he is author of his own punishment, as
being by the institution, author of all his sovereign shall do: and
because it is injustice for a man to do anything, for which he may be
punished by his own authority, he is also upon that title, unjust. And
whereas some men have pretended for their disobedience to their
sovereign, a new covenant, made, not with men, but with God; this also
is unjust: for there is no covenant with God, but by mediation of
somebody that representeth God’s person; which none doth but God’s
lieutenant, who hath the sovereignty under God. But this pretence of
covenant with God, is so evident a lie, even in the pretenders’ own
consciences, that it is not only an act of an unjust, but also of a
vile, and unmanly disposition.

[Sidenote: 2. Sovereign power cannot be forfeited.]

Secondly, because the right of bearing the person of them all, is given
to him they make sovereign, by covenant only of one to another, and not
of him to any of them; there can happen no breach of covenant on the
part of the sovereign; and consequently none of his subjects, by any
pretence of forfeiture, can be freed from his subjection. That he which
is made sovereign maketh no covenant with his subjects beforehand, is
manifest; because either he must make it with the whole multitude, as
one party to the covenant; or he must make a several covenant with every
man. With the whole, as one party, it is impossible; because as yet they
are not one person: and if he make so many several covenants as there be
men, those covenants after he hath the sovereignty are void; because
what act soever can be pretended by any one of them for breach thereof,
is the act both of himself, and of all the rest, because done in the
person, and by the right of every one of them in particular. Besides, if
any one, or more of them, pretend a breach of the covenant made by the
sovereign at his institution; and others, or one other of his subjects,
or himself alone, pretend there was no such breach, there is in this
case, no judge to decide the controversy; it returns therefore to the
sword again; and every man recovereth the right of protecting himself by
his own strength, contrary to the design they had in the institution. It
is therefore in vain to grant sovereignty by way of precedent covenant.
The opinion that any monarch receiveth his power by covenant, that is to
say, on condition, proceedeth from want of understanding this easy
truth, that covenants being but words and breath, have no force to
oblige, contain, constrain, or protect any man, but what it has from the
public sword; that is, from the untied hands of that man, or assembly of
men that hath the sovereignty, and whose actions are avouched by them
all, and performed by the strength of them all, in him united. But when
an assembly of men is made sovereign; then no man imagineth any such
covenant to have passed in the institution; for no man is so dull as to
say, for example, the people of Rome made a covenant with the Romans, to
hold the sovereignty on such or such conditions; which not performed,
the Romans might lawfully depose the Roman people. That men see not the
reason to be alike in a monarchy, and in a popular government,
proceedeth from the ambition of some, that are kinder to the government
of an assembly, whereof they may hope to participate, than of monarchy,
which they despair to enjoy.

[Sidenote: 3. No man can without injustice protest against the
           institution of the sovereign declared by the major part.]

Thirdly, because the major part hath by consenting voices declared a
sovereign; he that dissented must now consent with the rest; that is, be
contented to avow all the actions he shall do, or else justly be
destroyed by the rest. For if he voluntarily entered into the
congregation of them that were assembled, he sufficiently declared
thereby his will, and therefore tacitly covenanted, to stand to what the
major part should ordain: and therefore if he refuse to stand thereto,
or make protestation against any of their decrees, he does contrary to
his covenant, and therefore unjustly. And whether he be of the
congregation, or not; and whether his consent be asked, or not, he must
either submit to their decrees, or be left in the condition of war he
was in before; wherein he might without injustice be destroyed by any
man whatsoever.

[Sidenote: 4. The sovereign’s actions cannot be justly accused by the
           subject.]

Fourthly, because every subject is by this institution author of all the
actions, and judgments of the sovereign instituted; it follows, that
whatsoever he doth, it can be no injury to any of his subjects; nor
ought he to be by any of them accused of injustice. For he that doth
anything by authority from another, doth therein no injury to him by
whose authority he acteth: but by this institution of a commonwealth,
every particular man is author of all the sovereign doth: and
consequently he that complaineth of injury from his sovereign,
complaineth of that whereof he himself is author; and therefore ought
not to accuse any man but himself; no nor himself of injury; because to
do injury to one’s self, is impossible. It is true that they that have
sovereign power may commit iniquity; but not injustice, or injury in the
proper signification.

[Sidenote: 5. Whatsoever the sovereign doth is unpunishable by the
           subject.]

Fifthly, and consequently to that which was said last, no man that hath
sovereign power can justly be put to death, or otherwise in any manner
by his subjects punished. For seeing every subject is author of the
actions of his sovereign; he punisheth another for the actions committed
by himself.

[Sidenote: 6. The sovereign is judge of what is necessary for the peace
           and defence of his subjects.]

And because the end of this institution, is the peace and defence of
them all; and whosoever has right to the end, has right to the means; it
belongeth of right, to whatsoever man, or assembly that hath the
sovereignty, to be judge both of the means of peace and defence, and
also of the hindrances, and disturbances of the same; and to do
whatsoever he shall think necessary to be done, both beforehand, for the
preserving of peace and security, by prevention of discord at home, and
hostility from abroad; and, when peace and security are lost, for the
recovery of the same. And therefore,

[Sidenote: And judge of what doctrines are fit to be taught them.]

Sixthly, it is annexed to the sovereignty, to be judge of what opinions
and doctrines are averse, and what conducing to peace; and consequently,
on what occasions, how far, and what men are to be trusted withal, in
speaking to multitudes of people; and who shall examine the doctrines of
all books before they be published. For the actions of men proceed from
their opinions; and in the well-governing of opinions, consisteth the
well-governing of men’s actions, in order to their peace, and concord.
And though in matter of doctrine, nothing ought to be regarded but the
truth; yet this is not repugnant to regulating the same by peace. For
doctrine repugnant to peace, can no more be true, than peace and concord
can be against the law of nature. It is true, that in a commonwealth,
where by the negligence, or unskilfulness of governors, and teachers,
false doctrines are by time generally received; the contrary truths may
be generally offensive. Yet the most sudden, and rough bursting in of a
new truth, that can be, does never break the peace, but only sometimes
awake the war. For those men that are so remissly governed, that they
dare take up arms to defend, or introduce an opinion, are still in war;
and their condition not peace, but only a cessation of arms for fear of
one another; and they live, as it were, in the precincts of battle
continually. It belongeth therefore to him that hath the sovereign
power, to be judge, or constitute all judges of opinions and doctrines,
as a thing necessary to peace; thereby to prevent discord and civil war.

[Sidenote: 7. The right of making rules; whereby the subjects may every
           man know what is so his own, as no other subject can without
           injustice take it from him.]

Seventhly, is annexed to the sovereignty, the whole power of prescribing
the rules, whereby every man may know, what goods he may enjoy, and what
actions he may do, without being molested by any of his fellow-subjects;
and this is it men call _propriety_. For before constitution of
sovereign power, as hath already been shown, all men had right to all
things; which necessarily causeth war: and therefore this propriety,
being necessary to peace, and depending on sovereign power, is the act
of that power, in order to the public peace. These rules of propriety,
or _meum_ and _tuum_, and of _good_, _evil_, _lawful_, and _unlawful_ in
the actions of subjects, are the civil laws; that is to say, the laws of
each commonwealth in particular; though the name of civil law be now
restrained to the ancient civil laws of the city of Rome; which being
the head of a great part of the world, her laws at that time were in
these parts the civil law.

[Sidenote: 8. To him also belongeth the right of judicature and decision
           of controversy.]

Eighthly, is annexed to the sovereignty, the right of judicature; that
is to say, of hearing and deciding all controversies, which may arise
concerning law, either civil, or natural; or concerning fact. For
without the decision of controversies, there is no protection of one
subject, against the injuries of another; the laws concerning _meum_ and
_tuum_ are in vain; and to every man remaineth, from the natural and
necessary appetite of his own conservation, the right of protecting
himself by his private strength, which is the condition of war, and
contrary to the end for which every commonwealth is instituted.

[Sidenote: 9. And of making war, and peace, as he shall think best.]

Ninthly, is annexed to the sovereignty, the right of making war and
peace with other nations, and commonwealths; that is to say, of judging
when it is for the public good, and how great forces are to be
assembled, armed, and paid for that end; and to levy money upon the
subjects, to defray the expenses thereof. For the power by which the
people are to be defended, consisteth in their armies; and the strength
of an army, in the union of their strength under one command; which
command the sovereign instituted, therefore hath; because the command of
the _militia_, without other institution, maketh him that hath it
sovereign. And therefore whosoever is made general of an army, he that
hath the sovereign power is always generalissimo.

[Sidenote: 10. And of choosing all counsellors and ministers, both of
           peace & war.]

Tenthly, is annexed to the sovereignty, the choosing of all counsellors,
ministers, magistrates, and officers, both in peace, and war. For seeing
the sovereign is charged with the end, which is the common peace and
defence, he is understood to have power to use such means, as he shall
think most fit for his discharge.

[Sidenote: 11. And of rewarding and punishing, and that (where no former
           law hath determined the measure of it) arbitrarily.]

Eleventhly, to the sovereign is committed the power of rewarding with
riches, or honour, and of punishing with corporal or pecuniary
punishment, or with ignominy, every subject according to the law he hath
formerly made; or if there be no law made, according as he shall judge
most to conduce to the encouraging of men to serve the commonwealth, or
deterring of them from doing disservice to the same.

[Sidenote: 12. And of honour and order.]

Lastly, considering what value men are naturally apt to set upon
themselves; what respect they look for from others; and how little they
value other men; from whence continually arise amongst them, emulation,
quarrels, factions, and at last war, to the destroying of one another,
and diminution of their strength against a common enemy; it is necessary
that there be laws of honour, and a public rate of the worth of such men
as have deserved, or are able to deserve well of the commonwealth; and
that there be force in the hands of some or other, to put those laws in
execution. But it hath already been shown, that not only the whole
_militia_, or forces of the commonwealth; but also the judicature of all
controversies, is annexed to the sovereignty. To the sovereign therefore
it belongeth also to give titles of honour; and to appoint what order of
place, and dignity, each man shall hold; and what signs of respect, in
public or private meetings, they shall give to one another.

[Sidenote: These rights are indivisible.]

These are the rights, which make the essence of sovereignty; and which
are the marks, whereby a man may discern in what man, or assembly of
men, the sovereign power is placed, and resideth. For these are
incommunicable, and inseparable. The power to coin money; to dispose of
the estate and persons of infant heirs; to have præemption in markets;
and all other statute prerogatives, may be transferred by the sovereign;
and yet the power to protect his subjects be retained. But if he
transfer the _militia_, he retains the judicature in vain, for want of
execution of the laws: or if he grant away the power of raising money;
the _militia_ is in vain; or if he give away the government of
doctrines, men will be frighted into rebellion with the fear of spirits.
And so if we consider any one of the said rights, we shall presently
see, that the holding of all the rest will produce no effect, in the
conservation of peace and justice, the end for which all commonwealths
are instituted. And this division is it, whereof it is said, _a kingdom
divided in itself cannot stand_: for unless this division precede,
division into opposite armies can never happen. If there had not first
been an opinion received of the greatest part of England, that these
powers were divided between the King, and the Lords, and the House of
Commons, the people had never been divided and fallen into this civil
war; first between those that disagreed in politics; and after between
the dissenters about the liberty of religion; which have so instructed
men in this point of sovereign right, that there be few now in England
that do not see, that these rights are inseparable, and will be so
generally acknowledged at the next return of peace; and so continue,
till their miseries are forgotten; and no longer, except the vulgar be
better taught than they have hitherto been.

[Sidenote: And can by no grant pass away without direct renouncing of
           the sovereign power.]

And because they are essential and inseparable rights, it follows
necessarily, that in whatsoever words any of them seem to be granted
away, yet if the sovereign power itself be not in direct terms
renounced, and the name of sovereign no more given by the grantees to
him that grants them, the grant is void: for when he has granted all he
can, if we grant back the sovereignty, all is restored, as inseparably
annexed thereunto.

[Sidenote: The power and honour of subjects vanisheth in the presence of
           the power sovereign.]

This great authority being indivisible, and inseparably annexed to the
sovereignty, there is little ground for the opinion of them, that say of
sovereign kings, though they be _singulis majores_, of greater power
than every one of their subjects, yet they be _universis minores_, of
less power than them all together. For if by _all together_, they mean
not the collective body as one person, then _all together_, and _every
one_, signify the same; and the speech is absurd. But if by _all
together_, they understand them as one person, which person the
sovereign bears, then the power of all together, is the same with the
sovereign’s power; and so again the speech is absurd: which absurdity
they see well enough, when the sovereignty is in an assembly of the
people; but in a monarch they see it not; and yet the power of
sovereignty is the same in whomsoever it be placed.

And as the power, so also the honour of the sovereign, ought to be
greater, than that of any, or all the subjects. For in the sovereignty
is the fountain of honour. The dignities of lord, earl, duke, and prince
are his creatures. As in the presence of the master, the servants are
equal, and without any honour at all; so are the subjects, in the
presence of the sovereign. And though they shine some more, some less,
when they are out of his sight; yet in his presence, they shine no more
than the stars in the presence of the sun.

[Sidenote: Sovereign power not so hurtful as the want of it, and the
           hurt proceeds for the greatest part from not submitting
           readily to a less.]

But a man may here object, that the condition of subjects is very
miserable; as being obnoxious to the lusts, and other irregular passions
of him, or them that have so unlimited a power in their hands. And
commonly they that live under a monarch, think it the fault of monarchy;
and they that live under the government of democracy, or other sovereign
assembly, attribute all the inconvenience to that form of commonwealth;
whereas the power in all forms, if they be perfect enough to protect
them, is the same: not considering that the state of man can never be
without some incommodity or other; and that the greatest, that in any
form of government can possibly happen to the people in general, is
scarce sensible, in respect of the miseries, and horrible calamities,
that accompany a civil war, or that dissolute condition of masterless
men, without subjection to laws, and a coercive power to tie their hands
from rapine and revenge: nor considering that the greatest pressure of
sovereign governors, proceedeth not from any delight, or profit they can
expect in the damage or weakening of their subjects, in whose vigour,
consisteth their own strength and glory; but in the restiveness of
themselves, that unwillingly contributing to their own defence, make it
necessary for their governors to draw from them what they can in time of
peace, that they may have means on any emergent occasion, or sudden
need, to resist, or take advantage on their enemies. For all men are by
nature provided of notable multiplying glasses, that is their passions
and self-love, through which, every little payment appeareth a great
grievance; but are destitute of those prospective glasses, namely moral
and civil science, to see afar off the miseries that hang over them, and
cannot without such payments be avoided.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XIX.

                OF THE SEVERAL KINDS OF COMMONWEALTH BY
                 INSTITUTION, AND OF SUCCESSION TO THE
                            SOVEREIGN POWER.


[Sidenote: The different forms of commonwealths but three.]

The difference of commonwealths, consisteth in the difference of the
sovereign, or the person representative of all and every one of the
multitude. And because the sovereignty is either in one man, or in an
assembly of more than one; and into that assembly either every man hath
right to enter, or not every one, but certain men distinguished from the
rest; it is manifest, there can be but three kinds of commonwealth. For
the representative must needs be one man, or more: and if more, then it
is the assembly of all, or but of a part. When the representative is one
man, then is the commonwealth a MONARCHY: when an assembly of all that
will come together, then it is a DEMOCRACY, or popular commonwealth:
when an assembly of a a part only, then it is called an ARISTOCRACY.
Other kind of commonwealth there can be none: for either one, or more,
or all, must have the sovereign power, which I have shown to be
indivisible, entire.

[Sidenote: Tyranny and oligarchy, but different names of monarchy, and
           aristocracy.]

There be other names of government, in the histories, and books of
policy; as _tyranny_, and _oligarchy_: but they are not the names of
other forms of government, but of the same forms misliked. For they that
are discontented under _monarchy_, call it _tyranny_; and they that are
displeased with _aristocracy_, call it _oligarchy_: so also, they which
find themselves grieved under a _democracy_, call it _anarchy_, which
signifies want of government; and yet I think no man believes, that want
of government, is any new kind of government: nor by the same reason
ought they to believe, that the government is of one kind, when they
like it, and another, when they mislike it, or are oppressed by the
governors.

[Sidenote: Subordinate representatives dangerous.]

It is manifest, that men who are in absolute liberty, may, if they
please, give authority to one man, to represent them every one; as well
as give such authority to any assembly of men whatsoever; and
consequently may subject themselves, if they think good, to a monarch,
as absolutely, as to any other representative. Therefore, where there is
already erected a sovereign power, there can be no other representative
of the same people, but only to certain particular ends, by the
sovereign limited. For that were to erect two sovereigns; and every man
to have his person represented by two actors, that by opposing one
another, must needs divide that power, which, if men will live in peace,
is indivisible; and thereby reduce the multitude into the condition of
war, contrary to the end for which all sovereignty is instituted. And
therefore as it is absurd, to think that a sovereign assembly, inviting
the people of their dominion, to send up their deputies, with power to
make known their advice, or desires, should therefore hold such
deputies, rather than themselves, for the absolute representatives of
the people: so it is absurd also, to think the same in a monarchy. And I
know not how this so manifest a truth, should of late be so little
observed; that in a monarchy, he that had the sovereignty from a descent
of six hundred years, was alone called sovereign, had the title of
Majesty from every one of his subjects, and was unquestionably taken by
them for their king, was notwithstanding never considered as their
representative; the name without contradiction passing for the title of
those men, which at his command were sent up by the people to carry
their petitions, and give him, if he permitted it, their advice. Which
may serve as an admonition, for those that are the true, and absolute
representative of a people, to instruct men in the nature of that
office, and to take heed how they admit of any other general
representation upon any occasion whatsoever, if they mean to discharge
the trust committed to them.

[Sidenote: Comparison of monarchy, with sovereign assemblies.]

The difference between these three kinds of commonwealth, consisteth not
in the difference of power; but in the difference of convenience, or
aptitude to produce the peace, and security of the people; for which end
they were instituted. And to compare monarchy with the other two, we may
observe; first, that whosoever beareth the person of the people, or is
one of that assembly that bears it, beareth also his own natural person.
And though he be careful in his politic person to procure the common
interest; yet he is more, or no less careful to procure the private good
of himself, his family, kindred and friends; and for the most part, if
the public interest chance to cross the private, he prefers the private:
for the passions of men, are commonly more potent than their reason.
From whence it follows, that where the public and private interest are
most closely united, there is the public most advanced. Now in monarchy,
the private interest is the same with the public. The riches, power, and
honour of a monarch arise only from the riches, strength and reputation
of his subjects. For no king can be rich, nor glorious, nor secure,
whose subjects are either poor, or contemptible, or too weak through
want or dissention, to maintain a war against their enemies: whereas in
a democracy, or aristocracy, the public prosperity confers not so much
to the private fortune of one that is corrupt, or ambitious, as doth
many times a perfidious advice, a treacherous action, or a civil war.

Secondly, that a monarch receiveth counsel of whom, when, and where he
pleaseth; and consequently may hear the opinion of men versed in the
matter about which he deliberates, of what rank or quality soever, and
as long before the time of action, and with as much secrecy, as he will.
But when a sovereign assembly has need of counsel, none are admitted but
such as have a right thereto from the beginning; which for the most part
are of those who have been versed more in the acquisition of wealth than
of knowledge; and are to give their advice in long discourses, which
may, and do commonly excite men to action, but not govern them in it.
For the _understanding_ is by the flame of the passions, never
enlightened, but dazzled. Nor is there any place, or time, wherein an
assembly can receive counsel with secrecy, because of their own
multitude.

Thirdly, that the resolutions of a monarch, are subject to no other
inconstancy, than that of human nature; but in assemblies, besides that
of nature, there ariseth an inconstancy from the number. For the absence
of a few, that would have the resolution once taken, continue firm,
which may happen by security, negligence, or private impediments, or the
diligent appearance of a few of the contrary opinion, undoes to-day, all
that was concluded yesterday.

Fourthly, that a monarch cannot disagree with himself, out of envy, or
interest; but an assembly may; and that to such a height, as may produce
a civil war.

Fifthly, that in monarchy there is this inconvenience; that any subject,
by the power of one man, for the enriching of a favourite or flatterer,
may be deprived of all he possesseth; which I confess is a great and
inevitable inconvenience. But the same may as well happen, where the
sovereign power is in an assembly: for their power is the same; and they
are as subject to evil counsel, and to be seduced by orators, as a
monarch by flatterers; and becoming one another’s flatterers, serve one
another’s covetousness and ambition by turns. And whereas the favourites
of monarchs, are few, and they have none else to advance but their own
kindred; the favourites of an assembly, are many; and the kindred much
more numerous, than of any monarch. Besides, there is no favourite of a
monarch, which cannot as well succour his friends, as hurt his enemies:
but orators, that is to say, favourites of sovereign assemblies, though
they have great power to hurt, have little to save. For to accuse,
requires less eloquence, such is man’s nature, than to excuse; and
condemnation, than absolution more resembles justice.

Sixthly, that it is an inconvenience in monarchy, that the sovereignty
may descend upon an infant, or one that cannot discern between good and
evil: and consisteth in this, that the use of his power, must be in the
hand of another man, or of some assembly of men, which are to govern by
his right, and in his name; as curators, and protectors of his person,
and authority. But to say there is inconvenience, in putting the use of
the sovereign power, into the hand of a man, or an assembly of men; is
to say that all government is more inconvenient, than confusion, and
civil war. And therefore all the danger that can be pretended, must
arise from the contention of those, that for an office of so great
honour, and profit, may become competitors. To make it appear, that this
inconvenience, proceedeth not from that form of government we call
monarchy, we are to consider, that the precedent monarch hath appointed
who shall have the tuition of his infant successor, either expressly by
testament, or tacitly, by not controlling the custom in that case
received: and then such inconvenience, if it happen, is to be
attributed, not to the monarchy, but to the ambition, and injustice of
the subjects; which in all kinds of government, where the people are not
well instructed in their duty, and the rights of sovereignty, is the
same. Or else the precedent monarch hath not at all taken order for such
tuition; and then the law of nature hath provided this sufficient rule,
that the tuition shall be in him, that hath by nature most interest in
the preservation of the authority of the infant, and to whom least
benefit can accrue by his death, or diminution. For seeing every man by
nature seeketh his own benefit, and promotion; to put an infant into the
power of those, that can promote themselves by his destruction, or
damage, is not tuition, but treachery. So that sufficient provision
being taken, against all just quarrel, about the government under a
child, if any contention arise to the disturbance of the public peace,
it is not to be attributed to the form of monarchy, but to the ambition
of subjects, and ignorance of their duty. On the other side, there is no
great commonwealth, the sovereignty whereof is in a great assembly,
which is not, as to consultations of peace, and war, and making of laws,
in the same condition, as if the government were in a child. For as a
child wants the judgment to dissent from counsel given him, and is
thereby necessitated to take the advice of them, or him, to whom he is
committed: so an assembly wanteth the liberty, to dissent from the
counsel of the major part, be it good, or bad. And as a child has need
of a tutor, or protector, to preserve his person and authority: so also,
in great commonwealths, the sovereign assembly, in all great dangers and
troubles, have need of _custodes libertatis_; that is of dictators, or
protectors of their authority; which are as much as temporary monarchs,
to whom for a time, they may commit the entire exercise of their power;
and have, at the end of that time, been oftener deprived thereof, than
infant kings, by their protectors, regents, or any other tutors.

[Sidenote: Definition of monarchy, and other forms.]

Though the kinds of sovereignty be, as I have now shown, but three; that
is to say, monarchy, where one man has it; or democracy, where the
general assembly of subjects hath it; or aristocracy, where it is in an
assembly of certain persons nominated, or otherwise distinguished from
the rest: yet he that shall consider the particular commonwealths that
have been, and are in the world, will not perhaps easily reduce them to
three, and may thereby be inclined to think there be other forms,
arising from these mingled together. As for example, elective kingdoms;
where kings have the sovereign power put into their hands for a time; or
kingdoms, wherein the king hath a power limited: which governments, are
nevertheless by most writers called monarchy. Likewise if a popular, or
aristocratical commonwealth, subdue an enemy’s country, and govern the
same, by a president, procurator, or other magistrate; this may seem
perhaps at first sight, to be a democratical, or aristocratical
government. But it is not so. For elective kings, are not sovereigns,
but ministers of the sovereign; nor limited kings, sovereigns, but
ministers of them that have the sovereign power: nor are those provinces
which are in subjection to a democracy, or aristocracy of another
commonwealth, democratically or aristocratically governed, but
monarchically.

And first, concerning an elective king, whose power is limited to his
life, as it is in many places of Christendom at this day; or to certain
years or months, as the dictator’s power amongst the Romans; if he have
right to appoint his successor, he is no more elective but hereditary.
But if he have no power to elect his successor, then there is some other
man, or assembly known, which after his decease may elect anew, or else
the commonwealth dieth, and dissolveth with him, and returneth to the
condition of war. If it be known who have the power to give the
sovereignty after his death, it is known also that the sovereignty was
in them before: for none have right to give that which they have not
right to possess, and keep to themselves, if they think good. But if
there be none that can give the sovereignty, after the decease of him
that was first elected; then has he power, nay he is obliged by the law
of nature, to provide, by establishing his successor, to keep those that
had trusted him with the government, from relapsing into the miserable
condition of civil war. And consequently he was, when elected, a
sovereign absolute.

Secondly, that king whose power is limited, is not superior to him, or
them that have the power to limit it; and he that is not superior, is
not supreme; that is to say not sovereign. The sovereignty therefore was
always in that assembly which had the right to limit him; and by
consequence the government not monarchy, but either democracy, or
aristocracy; as of old time in Sparta; where the kings had a privilege
to lead their armies; but the sovereignty was in the Ephori.

Thirdly, whereas heretofore the Roman people governed the land of Judea,
for example, by a president; yet was not Judea therefore a democracy;
because they were not governed by any assembly, into the which, any of
them, had right to enter; nor an aristocracy; because they were not
governed by any assembly, into which, any man could enter by their
election: but they were governed by one person, which, though as to the
people of Rome, was an assembly of the people, or democracy; yet as to
the people of Judea, which had no right at all of participating in the
government, was a monarch. For though where the people are governed by
an assembly, chosen by themselves out of their own number, the
government is called a democracy, or aristocracy; yet when they are
governed by an assembly, not of their own choosing, it is a monarchy;
not of _one_ man, over another man; but of one people, over another
people.

[Sidenote: Of the right of succession.]

Of all these forms of government, the matter being mortal, so that not
only monarchs, but also whole assemblies die, it is necessary for the
conservation of the peace of men, that as there was order taken for an
artificial man, so there be order also taken, for an artificial eternity
of life; without which, men that are governed by an assembly, should
return into the condition of war in every age; and they that are
governed by one man, as soon as their governor dieth. This artificial
eternity, is that which men call the right of _succession_.

There is no perfect form of government, where the disposing of the
succession is not in the present sovereign. For if it be in any other
particular man, or private assembly, it is in a person subject and may
be assumed by the sovereign at his pleasure; and consequently the right
is in himself. And if it be in no particular man, but left to a new
choice; then is the commonwealth dissolved; and the right is in him that
can get it; contrary to the intention of them that did institute the
commonwealth, for their perpetual, and not temporary security.

In a democracy, the whole assembly cannot fail, unless the multitude
that are to be governed fail. And therefore questions of the right of
succession, have in that form of government no place at all.

In an aristocracy, when any of the assembly dieth, the election of
another into his room belongeth to the assembly, as the sovereign, to
whom belongeth the choosing of all counsellors and officers. For that
which the representative doth, as actor, every one of the subjects doth,
as author. And though the sovereign assembly may give power to others,
to elect new men, for supply of their court; yet it is still by their
authority, that the election is made; and by the same it may, when the
public shall require it, be recalled.

[Sidenote: The present monarch hath right to dispose of the succession.]

The greatest difficulty about the right of succession, is in monarchy:
and the difficulty ariseth from this, that at first sight, it is not
manifest who is to appoint the successor; nor many times, who it is whom
he hath appointed. For in both these cases, there is required a more
exact ratiocination, than every man is accustomed to use. As to the
question, who shall appoint the successor, of a monarch that hath the
sovereign authority; that is to say, who shall determine of the right of
inheritance, (for elective kings and princes have not the sovereign
power in propriety, but in use only), we are to consider, that either he
that is in possession, has right to dispose of the succession, or else
that right is again in the dissolved multitude. For the death of him
that hath the sovereign power in propriety, leaves the multitude without
any sovereign at all; that is, without any representative in whom they
should be united, and be capable of doing any one action at all: and
therefore they are incapable of election of any new monarch; every man
having equal right to submit himself to such as he thinks best able to
protect him; or if he can, protect himself by his own sword; which is a
return to confusion, and to the condition of a war of every man against
every man, contrary to the end for which monarchy had its first
institution. Therefore it is manifest, that by the institution of
monarchy, the disposing of the successor, is always left to the judgment
and will of the present possessor.

And for the question, which may arise sometimes, who it is that the
monarch in possession, hath designed to the succession and inheritance
of his power; it is determined by his express words, and testament; or
by other tacit signs sufficient.

[Sidenote: Succession passeth by express words;]

By express words, or testament, when it is declared by him in his
lifetime, _viva voce_, or by writing; as the first emperors of Rome
declared who should be their heirs. For the word heir does not of itself
imply the children, or nearest kindred of a man; but whomsoever a man
shall any way declare, he would have to succeed him in his estate. If
therefore a monarch declare expressly, that such a man shall be his
heir, either by word or writing, then is that man immediately after the
decease of his predecessor, invested in the right of being monarch.

[Sidenote: Or, by not controlling a custom;]

But where testament, and express words are wanting, other natural signs
of the will are to be followed: whereof the one is custom. And therefore
where the custom is, that the next of kindred absolutely succeedeth,
there also the next of kindred hath right to the succession; for that,
if the will of him that was in possession had been otherwise, he might
easily have declared the same in his life-time. And likewise where the
custom is, that the next of the male kindred succeedeth, there also the
right of succession is in the next of the kindred male, for the same
reason. And so it is if the custom were to advance the female. For
whatsoever custom a man may by a word control, and does not, it is a
natural sign he would have that custom stand.

[Sidenote: Or, by presumption of natural affection.]

But where neither custom, nor testament hath preceded, there it is to be
understood, first, that a monarch’s will is, that the government remain
monarchical; because he hath approved that government in himself.
Secondly, that a child of his own, male, or female, be preferred before
any other; because men are presumed to be more inclined by nature, to
advance their own children, than the children of other men; and of their
own, rather a male than a female; because men, are naturally fitter than
women, for actions of labour and danger. Thirdly, where his own issue
faileth, rather a brother than a stranger; and so still the nearer in
blood, rather than the more remote; because it is always presumed that
the nearer of kin, is the nearer in affection; and it is evident that a
man receives always, by reflection, the most honour from the greatness
of his nearest kindred.

[Sidenote: To dispose of the succession, though to a king of another
           nation, not unlawful.]

But if it be lawful for a monarch to dispose of the succession by words
of contract, or testament, men may perhaps object a great inconvenience:
for he may sell, or give his right of governing to a stranger; which,
because strangers, that is, men not used to live under the same
government, nor speaking the same language, do commonly undervalue one
another, may turn to the oppression of his subjects; which is indeed a
great inconvenience: but it proceedeth not necessarily from the
subjection to a stranger’s government, but from the unskilfulness of the
governors, ignorant of the true rules of politics. And therefore the
Romans when they had subdued many nations, to make their government
digestible, were wont to take away that grievance, as much as they
thought necessary, by giving sometimes to whole nations, and sometimes
to principal men of every nation they conquered, not only the
privileges, but also the name of Romans; and took many of them into the
senate, and offices of charge, even in the Roman city. And this was it
our most wise king, king James, aimed at, in endeavouring the union of
his two realms of England and Scotland. Which if he could have obtained,
had in all likelihood prevented the civil wars, which make both those
kingdoms, at this present, miserable. It is not therefore any injury to
the people, for a monarch to dispose of the succession by will; though
by the fault of many princes, it hath been sometimes found inconvenient.
Of the lawfulness of it, this also is an argument, that whatsoever
inconvenience can arrive by giving a kingdom to a stranger, may arrive
also by so marrying with strangers, as the right of succession may
descend upon them: yet this by all men is accounted lawful.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XX.

                 OF DOMINION PATERNAL, AND DESPOTICAL.


[Sidenote: A commonwealth by acquisition.]

A COMMONWEALTH _by acquisition_, is that, where the sovereign power is
acquired by force; and it is acquired by force, when men singly, or many
together by plurality of voices, for fear of death, or bonds, do
authorize all the actions of that man, or assembly, that hath their
lives and liberty in his power.

[Sidenote: Wherein different from a commonwealth by institution.]

And this kind of dominion, or sovereignty, differeth from sovereignty by
institution, only in this, that men who choose their sovereign, do it
for fear of one another, and not of him whom they institute: but in this
case, they subject themselves, to him they are afraid of. In both cases
they do it for fear: which is to be noted by them, that hold all such
covenants, as proceed from fear of death or violence, void: which if it
were true, no man, in any kind of commonwealth, could be obliged to
obedience. It is true, that in a commonwealth once instituted, or
acquired, promises proceeding from fear of death or violence, are no
covenants, nor obliging, when the thing promised is contrary to the
laws; but the reason is not, because it was made upon fear, but because
he that promiseth, hath no right in the thing promised. Also, when he
may lawfully perform, and doth not, it is not the invalidity of the
covenant, that absolveth him, but the sentence of the sovereign.
Otherwise, whensoever a man lawfully promiseth, he unlawfully breaketh:
but when the sovereign, who is the actor, acquitteth him, then he is
acquitted by him that extorted the promise, as by the author of such
absolution.

[Sidenote: The rights of sovereignty the same in both.]

But the rights, and consequences of sovereignty, are the same in both.
His power cannot, without his consent, be transferred to another: he
cannot forfeit it: he cannot be accused by any of his subjects, of
injury: he cannot be punished by them: he is judge of what is necessary
for peace; and judge of doctrines: he is sole legislator; and supreme
judge of controversies; and of the times, and occasions of war, and
peace: to him it belongeth to choose magistrates, counsellors,
commanders, and all other officers, and ministers; and to determine of
rewards, and punishments, honour, and order. The reasons whereof, are
the same which are alleged in the precedent chapter, for the same
rights, and consequences of sovereignty by institution.

[Sidenote: Dominion paternal how attained.]

Dominion is acquired two ways; by generation, and by conquest. The right
of dominion by generation, is that, which the parent hath over his
children; and is called PATERNAL. [Sidenote: Not by generation, but by
contract;] And is not so derived from the generation, as if therefore
the parent had dominion over his child because he begat him; but from
the child’s consent, either express, or by other sufficient arguments
declared. For as to the generation, God hath ordained to man a helper;
and there be always two that are equally parents: the dominion therefore
over the child, should belong equally to both; and he be equally subject
to both, which is impossible; for no man can obey two masters. And
whereas some have attributed the dominion to the man only, as being of
the more excellent sex; they misreckon in it. For there is not always
that difference of strength, or prudence between the man and the woman,
as that the right can be determined without war. In commonwealths, this
controversy is decided by the civil law; and for the most part, but not
always, the sentence is in favour of the father; because for the most
part commonwealths have been erected by the fathers, not by the mothers
of families. But the question lieth now in the state of mere nature;
where there are supposed no laws of matrimony; no laws for the education
of children; but the law of nature, and the natural inclination of the
sexes, one to another, and to their children. In this condition of mere
nature, either the parents between themselves dispose of the dominion
over the child by contract; or do not dispose thereof at all. If they
dispose thereof, the right passeth according to the contract. We find in
history that the Amazons contracted with the men of the neighbouring
countries, to whom they had recourse for issue, that the issue male
should be sent back, but the female remain with themselves: so that the
dominion of the females was in the mother.

[Sidenote: Or education;]

If there be no contract, the dominion is in the mother. For in the
condition of mere nature, where there are no matrimonial laws, it cannot
be known who is the father, unless it be declared by the mother: and
therefore the right of dominion over the child dependeth on her will,
and is consequently hers. Again, seeing the infant is first in the power
of the mother, so as she may either nourish, or expose it; if she
nourish it, it oweth its life to the mother; and is therefore obliged to
obey her, rather than any other; and by consequence the dominion over it
is hers. But if she expose it, and another find and nourish it, the
dominion is in him that nourisheth it. For it ought to obey him by whom
it is preserved; because preservation of life being the end, for which
one man becomes subject to another, every man is supposed to promise
obedience, to him, in whose power it is to save, or destroy him.

[Sidenote: Or precedent subjection of one of the parents to the other.]

If the mother be the father’s subject, the child, is in the father’s
power: and if the father be the mother’s subject, as when a sovereign
queen marrieth one of her subjects, the child is subject to the mother;
because the father also is her subject.

If a man and woman, monarchs of two several kingdoms, have a child, and
contract concerning who shall have the dominion of him, the right of the
dominion passeth by the contract. If they contract not, the dominion
followeth the dominion of the place of his residence. For the sovereign
of each country hath dominion over all that reside therein.

He that hath the dominion over the child, hath dominion also over the
children of the child; and over their children’s children. For he that
hath dominion over the person of a man, hath dominion over all that is
his; without which, dominion were but a title, without the effect.

[Sidenote: The right of succession followeth the rules of the right of
           possession.]

The right of succession to paternal dominion, proceedeth in the same
manner, as doth the right of succession of monarchy; of which I have
already sufficiently spoken in the precedent chapter.

[Sidenote: Despotical dominion attained.]

Dominion acquired by conquest, or victory in war, is that which some
writers call DESPOTICAL, from Δεσπότης, which signifieth a _lord_, or
_master_; and is the dominion of the master over his servant. And this
dominion is then acquired to the victor, when the vanquished, to avoid
the present stroke of death, covenanteth either in express words, or by
other sufficient signs of the will, that so long as his life, and the
liberty of his body is allowed him, the victor shall have the use
thereof, at his pleasure. And after such covenant made, the vanquished
is a SERVANT, and not before: for by the word _servant_, whether it be
derived from _servire_, to serve, or from _servare_, to save, which I
leave to grammarians to dispute, is not meant a captive, which is kept
in prison, or bonds, till the owner of him that took him, or bought him
of one that did, shall consider what to do with him: for such men,
commonly called slaves, have no obligation at all; but may break their
bonds, or the prison; and kill, or carry away captive their master,
justly: but one, that being taken, hath corporal liberty allowed him;
and upon promise not to run away, nor to do violence to his master, is
trusted by him.

[Sidenote: Not by the victory, but by the consent of the vanquished.]

It is not therefore the victory, that giveth the right of dominion over
the vanquished, but his own covenant. Nor is he obliged because he is
conquered; that is to say, beaten, and taken, or put to flight; but
because he cometh in, and submitteth to the victor; nor is the victor
obliged by an enemy’s rendering himself, without promise of life, to
spare him for this his yielding to discretion; which obliges not the
victor longer, than in his own discretion he shall think fit.

And that which men do, when they demand, as it is now called, _quarter_,
which the Greeks called Ζωγρία, _taking alive_, is to evade the present
fury of the victor, by submission, and to compound for their life, with
ransom, or service: and therefore he that hath quarter, hath not his
life given, but deferred till farther deliberation; for it is not a
yielding on condition of life, but to discretion. And then only is his
life in security, and his service due, when the victor hath trusted him
with his corporal liberty. For slaves that work in prisons; or fetters,
do it not of duty, but to avoid the cruelty of their task-masters.

The master of the servant, is master also of all he hath: and may exact
the use thereof; that is to say, of his goods, of his labour, of his
servants, and of his children, as often as he shall think fit. For he
holdeth his life of his master, by the covenant of obedience; that is,
of owning, and authorizing whatsoever the master shall do. And in case
the master, if he refuse, kill him, or cast him into bonds, or otherwise
punish him for his disobedience, he is himself the author of the same;
and cannot accuse him of injury.

In sum, the rights and consequences of both _paternal_ and _despotical_
dominion, are the very same with those of a sovereign by institution;
and for the same reasons: which reasons are set down in the precedent
chapter. So that for a man that is monarch of divers nations, whereof he
hath, in one the sovereignty by institution of the people assembled, and
in another by conquest, that is by the submission of each particular, to
avoid death or bonds; to demand of one nation more than of the other,
from the title of conquest, as being a conquered nation, is an act of
ignorance of the rights of sovereignty; for the sovereign is absolute
over both alike; or else there is no sovereignty at all; and so every
man may lawfully protect himself, if he can, with his own sword, which
is the condition of war.

[Sidenote: Difference between a family and a kingdom.]

By this it appears; that a great family, if it be not part of some
commonwealth, is of itself, as to the rights of sovereignty, a little
monarchy: whether that family consist of a man and his children; or of a
man and his servants; or of a man, and his children, and servants
together: wherein the father or master is the sovereign. But yet a
family is not properly a commonwealth; unless it be of that power by its
own number, or by other opportunities, as not to be subdued without the
hazard of war. For where a number of men are manifestly too weak to
defend themselves united, every one may use his own reason in time of
danger, to save his own life, either by flight, or by submission to the
enemy, as he shall think best; in the same manner as a very small
company of soldiers, surprised by an army, may cast down their arms, and
demand quarter, or run away, rather than be put to the sword. And thus
much shall suffice, concerning what I find by speculation, and
deduction, of sovereign rights, from the nature, need, and designs of
men, in erecting of commonwealths, and putting themselves under
monarchs, or assemblies, entrusted with power enough for their
protection.

[Sidenote: The rights of monarchy from Scripture.]

Let us now consider what the Scripture teacheth in the same point. To
Moses, the children of Israel say thus: _Speak thou to us, and we will
hear thee; but let not God speak to us, lest we die_. (_Exod._ xx. 19.)
This is absolute obedience to Moses. Concerning the right of kings, God
himself by the mouth of Samuel, saith, (_1 Sam._ viii. 11, 12, &c.)
_This shall be the right of the king you will have to reign over you. He
shall take your sons, and set them to drive his chariots, and to be his
horsemen, and to run before his chariots; and gather in his harvest; and
to make his engines of war, and instruments of his chariots; and shall
take your daughters to make perfumes, to be his cooks, and bakers. He
shall take your fields, your vine-yards, and your olive-yards, and give
them to his servants. He shall take the tithe of your corn and wine, and
give it to the men of his chamber, and to his other servants. He shall
take your man-servants, and your maid-servants, and the choice of your
youth, and employ them in his business. He shall take the tithe of your
flocks; and you shall be his servants._ This is absolute power, and
summed up in the last words, _you shall be his servants_. Again, when
the people heard what power their king was to have, yet they consented
thereto, and say thus, (_verse_ 10) _we will be as all other nations,
and our king shall judge our causes, and go before us, to conduct our
wars_. Here is confirmed the right that sovereigns have, both to the
_militia_, and to all _judicature_; in which is contained as absolute
power, as one man can possibly transfer to another. Again, the prayer of
king Solomon to God, was this (_1 Kings_, iii. 9): _Give to thy servant
understanding, to judge thy people, and to discern between good and
evil_. It belongeth therefore to the sovereign to be _judge_, and to
prescribe the rules of _discerning good_ and _evil_: which rules are
laws; and therefore in him is the legislative power. Saul sought the
life of David; yet when it was in his power to slay Saul, and his
servants would have done it, David forbad them, saying, (_1 Sam._ xxiv.
6) _God forbid I should do such an act against my Lord, the anointed of
God_. For obedience of servants St. Paul saith; (_Col._ iii. 22)
_Servants obey your masters in all things_; and, (_Col._ iii. 20)
_children obey your parents in all things_. There is simple obedience in
those that are subject to paternal, or despotical dominion. Again,
(_Matt._ xxiii. 2, 3) _The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses’ chair,
and therefore all that they shall bid you observe, that observe and do_.
There again is simple obedience. And St. Paul, (_Titus_ iii. 2) _Warn
them that they subject themselves to princes, and to those that are in
authority, and obey them_. This obedience is also simple. Lastly, our
Saviour himself acknowledges, that men ought to pay such taxes as are by
kings imposed, where he says, _give to Cæsar that which is Cæsar’s_; and
paid such taxes himself. And that the king’s word, is sufficient to take
anything from any subject, when there is need; and that the king is
judge of that need: for he himself, as king of the Jews, commanded his
disciples to take the ass, and ass’s colt to carry him into Jerusalem,
saying, (_Matth._ xxi. 2, 3) _Go into the village over against you, and
you shall find a she ass tied, and her colt with her, untie them, and
bring them to me. And if any man ask you, what you mean by it, say the
Lord hath need of them: and they will let them go._ They will not ask
whether his necessity be a sufficient title; nor whether he be judge of
that necessity; but acquiesce in the will of the Lord.

To these places may be added also that of _Genesis_, (iii. 5) _Ye shall
be as gods, knowing good and evil_. And (_verse_ 11) _Who told thee that
thou wast naked? hast thou eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee
thou shouldest not eat?_ For the cognizance or judicature of _good_ and
_evil_, being forbidden by the name of the fruit of the tree of
knowledge, as a trial of Adam’s obedience; the devil to inflame the
ambition of the woman, to whom that fruit already seemed beautiful, told
her that by tasting it, they should be as gods, knowing _good_ and
_evil_. Whereupon having both eaten, they did indeed take upon them
God’s office, which is judicature of good and evil; but acquired no new
ability to distinguish between them aright. And whereas it is said, that
having eaten, they saw they were naked; no man hath so interpreted that
place, as if they had been formerly blind, and saw not their own skins:
the meaning is plain, that it was then they first judged their
nakedness, wherein it was God’s will to create them, to be uncomely; and
by being ashamed, did tacitly censure God himself. And thereupon God
saith; _Hast thou eaten, &c._ as if he should say, doest thou that owest
me obedience, take upon thee to judge of my commandments? Whereby it is
clearly, though allegorically, signified, that the commands of them that
have the right to command, are not by their subjects to be censured, nor
disputed.

[Sidenote: Sovereign power ought in all commonwealths to be absolute.]

So that it appeareth plainly, to my understanding, both from reason, and
Scripture, that the sovereign power, whether placed in one man, as in
monarchy, or in one assembly of men, as in popular, and aristocratical
commonwealths, is as great, as possibly men can be imagined to make it.
And though of so unlimited a power, men may fancy many evil
consequences, yet the consequences of the want of it, which is perpetual
war of every man against his neighbour, are much worse. The condition of
man in this life shall never be without inconveniences; but there
happeneth in no commonwealth any great inconvenience, but what proceeds
from the subject’s disobedience, and breach of those covenants, from
which the commonwealth hath its being. And whosoever thinking sovereign
power too great, will seek to make it less, must subject himself, to the
power, that can limit it; that is to say, to a greater.

The greatest objection is, that of the practice; when men ask, where,
and when, such power has by subjects been acknowledged. But one may ask
them again, when, or where has there been a kingdom long free from
sedition and civil war. In those nations, whose commonwealths have been
long-lived, and not been destroyed but by foreign war, the subjects
never did dispute of the sovereign power. But howsoever, an argument
from the practice of men, that have not sifted to the bottom, and with
exact reason weighed the causes, and nature of commonwealths, and suffer
daily those miseries, that proceed from the ignorance thereof, is
invalid. For though in all places of the world, men should lay the
foundation of their houses on the sand, it could not thence be inferred,
that so it ought to be. The skill of making, and maintaining
commonwealths, consisteth in certain rules, as doth arithmetic and
geometry; not, as tennis-play, on practice only: which rules, neither
poor men have the leisure, nor men that have had the leisure, have
hitherto had the curiosity, or the method to find out.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XXI.

                      OF THE LIBERTY OF SUBJECTS.


[Sidenote: Liberty what.]

LIBERTY, or FREEDOM, signifieth, properly, the absence of opposition; by
opposition, I mean external impediments of motion; and may be applied no
less to irrational, and inanimate creatures, than to rational. For
whatsoever is so tied, or environed, as it cannot move but within a
certain space, which space is determined by the opposition of some
external body, we say it hath not liberty to go further. And so of all
living creatures, whilst they are imprisoned, or restrained, with walls,
or chains; and of the water whilst it is kept in by banks, or vessels,
that otherwise would spread itself into a larger space, we use to say,
they are not at liberty, to move in such manner, as without those
external impediments they would. But when the impediment of motion, is
in the constitution of the thing itself, we use not to say; it wants the
liberty; but the power to move; as when a stone lieth still, or a man is
fastened to his bed by sickness.

[Sidenote: What it is to be free.]

And according to this proper, and generally received meaning of the
word, a FREEMAN, _is he, that in those things, which by his strength and
wit he is able to do, is not hindered to do what he has a will to_. But
when the words _free_, and _liberty_, are applied to any thing but
_bodies_, they are abused; for that which is not subject to motion, is
not subject to impediment: and therefore, when it is said, for example,
the way is free, no liberty of the way is signified, but of those that
walk in it without stop. And when we say a gift is free, there is not
meant any liberty of the gift, but of the giver, that was not bound by
any law or covenant to give it. So when we _speak freely_, it is not the
liberty of voice, or pronunciation, but of the man, whom no law hath
obliged to speak otherwise than he did. Lastly, from the use of the word
_free-will_, no liberty can be inferred of the will, desire, or
inclination, but the liberty of the man; which consisteth in this, that
he finds no stop, in doing what he has the will, desire, or inclination
to do.

[Sidenote: Fear and liberty are consistent.]

Fear and liberty are consistent; as when a man throweth his goods into
the sea for _fear_ the ship should sink, he doth it nevertheless very
willingly, and may refuse to do it if he will: it is therefore the
action of one that was _free_: so a man sometimes pays his debt, only
for _fear_ of imprisonment, which because nobody hindered him from
detaining, was the action of a man at _liberty_. And generally all
actions which men do in commonwealths, for _fear_ of the law, are
actions, which the doers had _liberty_ to omit.

[Sidenote: Liberty and necessity consistent.]

_Liberty_, and _necessity_ are consistent: as in the water, that hath
not only _liberty_, but a _necessity_ of descending by the channel; so
likewise in the actions which men voluntarily do: which, because they
proceed from their will, proceed from _liberty_; and yet, because every
act of man’s will, and every desire, and inclination proceedeth from
some cause, and that from another cause, in a continual chain, whose
first link is in the hand of God the first of all causes, proceed from
_necessity_. So that to him that could see the connexion of those
causes, the _necessity_ of all men’s voluntary actions, would appear
manifest. And therefore God, that seeth, and disposeth all things, seeth
also that the _liberty_ of man in doing what he will, is accompanied
with the _necessity_ of doing that which God will, and no more, nor
less. For though men may do many things, which God does not command, nor
is therefore author of them; yet they can have no passion, nor appetite
to anything, of which appetite God’s will is not the cause. And did not
his will assure the _necessity_ of man’s will, and consequently of all
that on man’s will dependeth, the _liberty_ of men would be a
contradiction, and impediment to the omnipotence and _liberty_ of God.
And this shall suffice, as to the matter in hand, of that natural
_liberty_, which only is properly called _liberty_.

[Sidenote: Artificial bonds, or covenants.]

But as men, for the attaining of peace, and conservation of themselves
thereby, have made an artificial man, which we call a commonwealth; so
also have they made artificial chains, called _civil laws_, which they
themselves, by mutual covenants, have fastened at one end, to the lips
of that man, or assembly, to whom they have given the sovereign power;
and at the other end to their own ears. These bonds, in their own nature
but weak, may nevertheless be made to hold, by the danger, though not by
the difficulty of breaking them.

[Sidenote: Liberty of subjects consisteth in liberty from covenants.]

In relation to these bonds only it is, that I am to speak now, of the
_liberty_ of _subjects_. For seeing there is no commonwealth in the
world, wherein there be rules enough set down, for the regulating of all
the actions, and words of men; as being a thing impossible: it followeth
necessarily, that in all kinds of actions by the laws prætermitted, men
have the liberty, of doing what their own reasons shall suggest, for the
most profitable to themselves. For if we take liberty in the proper
sense, for corporal liberty; that is to say, freedom from chains and
prison; it were very absurd for men to clamour as they do, for the
liberty they so manifestly enjoy. Again, if we take liberty, for an
exemption from laws, it is it no less absurd, for men to demand as they
do, that liberty, by which all other men may be masters of their lives.
And yet, as absurd as it is, this is it they demand; not knowing that
the laws are of no power to protect them, without a sword in the hands
of a man, or men, to cause those laws to be put in execution. The
liberty of a subject, lieth therefore only in those things, which in
regulating their actions, the sovereign hath prætermitted: such as is
the liberty to buy, and sell, and otherwise contract with one another;
to choose their own abode, their own diet, their own trade of life, and
institute their children as they themselves think fit; and the like.

[Sidenote: Liberty of the subject consistent with the unlimited power of
           the sovereign.]

Nevertheless we are not to understand, that by such liberty, the
sovereign power of life and death, is either abolished, or limited. For
it has been already shown, that nothing the sovereign representative can
do to a subject, on what pretence soever, can properly be called
injustice, or injury; because every subject is author of every act the
sovereign doth; so that he never wanteth right to anything, otherwise,
than as he himself is the subject of God, and bound thereby to observe
the laws of nature. And therefore it may, and doth often happen in
commonwealths, that a subject may be put to death, by the command of the
sovereign power; and yet neither do the other wrong: as when Jephtha
caused his daughter to be sacrificed: in which, and the like cases, he
that so dieth, had liberty to do the action, for which he is
nevertheless, without injury put to death. And the same holdeth also in
a sovereign prince, that putteth to death an innocent subject. For
though the action be against the law of nature, as being contrary to
equity, as was the killing of Uriah, by David; yet it was not an injury
to Uriah, but to God. Not to Uriah, because the right to do what he
pleased was given him by Uriah himself: and yet to God, because David
was God’s subject, and prohibited all iniquity by the law of nature:
which distinction, David himself, when he repented the fact, evidently
confirmed, saying, _To thee only have I sinned_. In the same manner, the
people of Athens, when they banished the most potent of their
commonwealth for ten years, thought they committed no injustice; and yet
they never questioned what crime he had done; but what hurt he would do:
nay they commanded the banishment of they knew not whom; and every
citizen bringing his oystershell into the market place, written with the
name of him he desired should be banished, without actually accusing
him, sometimes banished an Aristides, for his reputation of justice; and
sometimes a scurrilous jester, as Hyperbolus, to make a jest of it. And
yet a man cannot say, the sovereign people of Athens wanted right to
banish them; or an Athenian the liberty to jest, or to be just.

[Sidenote: The liberty which writers praise, is the liberty of
           sovereigns; not of private men.]

The liberty, whereof there is so frequent and honourable mention, in the
histories, and philosophy of the ancient Greeks, and Romans, and in the
writings, and discourse of those that from them have received all their
learning in the politics, is not the liberty of particular men; but the
liberty of the commonwealth: which is the same with that which every man
then should have, if there were no civil laws, nor commonwealth at all.
And the effects of it also be the same. For as amongst masterless men,
there is perpetual war, of every man against his neighbour; no
inheritance, to transmit to the son, nor to expect from the father; no
propriety of goods, or lands; no security; but a full and absolute
liberty in every particular man: so in states, and commonwealths not
dependent on one another, every commonwealth, not every man, has an
absolute liberty, to do what it shall judge, that is to say, what that
man, or assembly that representeth it, shall judge most conducing to
their benefit. But withal, they live in the condition of a perpetual
war, and upon the confines of battle, with their frontiers armed, and
cannons planted against their neighbours round about. The Athenians, and
Romans were free; that is, free commonwealths: not that any particular
men had the liberty to resist their own representative; but that their
representative had the liberty to resist, or invade other people. There
is written on the turrets of the city of Lucca in great characters at
this day, the word LIBERTAS; yet no man can thence infer, that a
particular man has more liberty, or immunity from the service of the
commonwealth there, than in Constantinople. Whether a commonwealth be
monarchical, or popular, the freedom is still the same.

But it is an easy thing, for men to be deceived, by the specious name of
liberty; and for want of judgment to distinguish, mistake that for their
private inheritance, and birth-right, which is the right of the public
only. And when the same error is confirmed by the authority of men in
reputation for their writings on this subject, it is no wonder if it
produce sedition, and change of government. In these western parts of
the world, we are made to receive our opinions concerning the
institution, and rights of commonwealths, from Aristotle, Cicero, and
other men, Greeks and Romans, that living under popular states, derived
those rights, not from the principles of nature, but transcribed them
into their books, out of the practice of their own commonwealths, which
were popular; as the grammarians describe the rules of language, out of
the practice of the time; or the rules of poetry, out of the poems of
Homer and Virgil. And because the Athenians were taught, to keep them
from desire of changing their government, that they were freemen, and
all that lived under monarchy were slaves; therefore Aristotle puts it
down in his _Politics_, (_lib._ 6. _cap._ ii.) _In democracy_, LIBERTY
_is to be supposed: for it is commonly held, that no man is_ FREE _in
any other government_. And as Aristotle; so Cicero, and other writers
have grounded their civil doctrine, on the opinions of the Romans, who
were taught to hate monarchy, at first, by them that having deposed
their sovereign, shared amongst them the sovereignty of Rome; and
afterwards by their successors. And by reading of these Greek, and Latin
authors, men from their childhood have gotten a habit, under a false
show of liberty, of favouring tumults, and of licentious controlling the
actions of their sovereigns, and again of controlling those controllers;
with the effusion of so much blood, as I think I may truly say, there
was never any thing so dearly bought, as these western parts have bought
the learning of the Greek and Latin tongues.

[Sidenote: Liberty of subjects how to be measured.]

To come now to the particulars of the true liberty of a subject; that is
to say, what are the things, which though commanded by the sovereign, he
may nevertheless, without injustice, refuse to do; we are to consider,
what rights we pass away, when we make a commonwealth; or, which is all
one, what liberty we deny ourselves, by owning all the actions, without
exception, of the man, or assembly we make our sovereign. For in the act
of our _submission_, consisteth both our _obligation_, and our
_liberty_; which must therefore be inferred by arguments taken from
thence; there being no obligation on any man, which ariseth not from
some act of his own; for all men equally, are by nature free. And
because such arguments, must either be drawn from the express words, _I
authorize all his actions_, or from the intention of him that submitteth
himself to his power, which intention is to be understood by the end for
which he so submitteth; the obligation, and liberty of the subject, is
to be derived, either from those words, or others equivalent; or else
from the end of the institution of sovereignty, namely, the peace of the
subjects within themselves, and their defence against a common enemy.

[Sidenote: Subjects have liberty to defend their own bodies, even
           against them that lawfully invade them.]

First therefore, seeing sovereignty by institution, is by covenant of
every one to every one; and sovereignty by acquisition, by covenants of
the vanquished to the victor, or child to the parent; it is manifest,
that every subject has liberty in all those things, the right whereof
cannot by covenant be transferred. I have shewn before in the 14th
chapter, that covenants, not to defend a man’s own body, are void.
Therefore,

[Sidenote: Are not bound to hurt themselves.]

If the sovereign command a man, though justly condemned, to kill, wound,
or maim himself; or not to resist those that assault him; or to abstain
from the use of food, air, medicine, or any other thing, without which
he cannot live; yet hath that man the liberty to disobey.

If a man be interrogated by the sovereign, or his authority, concerning
a crime done by himself, he is not bound, without assurance of pardon,
to confess it; because no man, as I have shown in the same chapter, can
be obliged by covenant to accuse himself.

Again, the consent of a subject to sovereign power, is contained in
these words, _I authorize, or take upon me, all his actions_; in which
there is no restriction at all, of his own former natural liberty: for
by allowing him to _kill me_, I am not bound to kill myself when he
commands me. It is one thing to say, _kill me, or my fellow, if you
please_; another thing to say, _I will kill myself, or my fellow_. It
followeth therefore, that

No man is bound by the words themselves, either to kill himself, or any
other man; and consequently, that the obligation a man may sometimes
have, upon the command of the sovereign to execute any dangerous, or
dishonourable office, dependeth not on the words of our submission; but
on the intention, which is to be understood by the end thereof. When
therefore our refusal to obey, frustrates the end for which the
sovereignty was ordained; then there is no liberty to refuse: otherwise
there is.

[Sidenote: Nor to warfare, unless they voluntarily undertake it.]

Upon this ground, a man that is commanded as a soldier to fight against
the enemy, though his sovereign have right enough to punish his refusal
with death, may nevertheless in many cases refuse, without injustice; as
when he substituteth a sufficient soldier in his place: for in this case
he deserteth not the service of the commonwealth. And there is allowance
to be made for natural timorousness; not only to women, of whom no such
dangerous duty is expected, but also to men of feminine courage. When
armies fight, there is on one side, or both, a running away; yet when
they do it not out of treachery, but fear, they are not esteemed to do
it unjustly, but dishonourably. For the same reason, to avoid battle, is
not injustice, but cowardice. But he that inrolleth himself a soldier,
or taketh imprest money, taketh away the excuse of a timorous nature;
and is obliged, not only to go to the battle, but also not to run from
it, without his captain’s leave. And when the defence of the
commonwealth, requireth at once the help of all that are able to bear
arms, every one is obliged; because otherwise the institution of the
commonwealth, which they have not the purpose, or courage to preserve,
was in vain.

To resist the sword of the commonwealth, in defence of another man,
guilty, or innocent, no man hath liberty; because such liberty, takes
away from the sovereign, the means of protecting us; and is therefore
destructive of the very essence of government. But in case a great many
men together, have already resisted the sovereign power unjustly, or
committed some capital crime, for which every one of them expecteth
death, whether have they not the liberty then to join together, and
assist, and defend one another? Certainly they have: for they but defend
their lives, which the guilty man may as well do, as the innocent. There
was indeed injustice in the first breach of their duty; their bearing of
arms subsequent to it, though it be to maintain what they have done, is
no new unjust act. And if it be only to defend their persons, it is not
unjust at all. But the offer of pardon taketh from them, to whom it is
offered, the plea of self-defence, and maketh their perseverance in
assisting, or defending the rest, unlawful.

[Sidenote: The greatest liberty of subjects, dependeth on the silence of
           the law.]

As for other liberties, they depend on the silence of the law. In cases
where the sovereign has prescribed no rule, there the subject hath the
liberty to do, or forbear, according to his own discretion. And
therefore such liberty is in some places more, and in some less; and in
some times more, in other times less, according as they that have the
sovereignty shall think most convenient. As for example, there was a
time, when in England a man might enter into his own land, and
dispossess such as wrongfully possessed it, by force. But in aftertimes,
that liberty of forcible entry, was taken away by a statute made, by the
king, in parliament. And in some places of the world, men have the
liberty of many wives: in other places, such liberty is not allowed.

If a subject have a controversy with his sovereign, of debt, or of right
of possession of lands or goods, or concerning any service required at
his hands, or concerning any penalty, corporal, or pecuniary, grounded
on a precedent law; he hath the same liberty to sue for his right, as if
it were against a subject; and before such judges, as are appointed by
the sovereign. For seeing the sovereign demandeth by force of a former
law, and not by virtue of his power; he declareth thereby, that he
requireth no more, than shall appear to be due by that law. The suit
therefore is not contrary to the will of the sovereign; and consequently
the subject hath the liberty to demand the hearing of his cause; and
sentence, according to that law. But if he demand, or take anything by
pretence of his power; there lieth, in that case, no action of law; for
all that is done by him in virtue of his power, is done by the authority
of every subject, and consequently he that brings an action against the
sovereign, brings it against himself.

If a monarch, or sovereign assembly, grant a liberty to all, or any of
his subjects, which grant standing, he is disabled to provide for their
safety, the grant is void; unless he directly renounce, or transfer the
sovereignty to another. For in that he might openly, if it had been his
will, and in plain terms, have renounced, or transferred it, and did
not; it is to be understood it was not his will, but that the grant
proceeded from ignorance of the repugnancy between such a liberty and
the sovereign power; and therefore the sovereignty is still retained;
and consequently all those powers, which are necessary to the exercising
thereof; such as are the power of war, and peace, of judicature, of
appointing officers, and councillors, of levying money, and the rest
named in the 18th chapter.

[Sidenote: In what cases subjects are absolved of their obedience to
           their sovereign.]

The obligation of subjects to the sovereign, is understood to last as
long, and no longer, than the power lasteth, by which he is able to
protect them. For the right men have by nature to protect themselves,
when none else can protect them, can by no covenant be relinquished. The
sovereignty is the soul of the commonwealth; which once departed from
the body, the members do no more receive their motion from it. The end
of obedience is protection; which, wheresoever a man seeth it, either in
his own, or in another’s sword, nature applieth his obedience to it, and
his endeavour to maintain it. And though sovereignty, in the intention
of them that make it, be immortal; yet is it in its own nature, not only
subject to violent death, by foreign war; but also through the
ignorance, and passions of men, it hath in it, from the very
institution, many seeds of a natural mortality, by intestine discord.

[Sidenote: In case of captivity.]

If a subject be taken prisoner in war; or his person, or his means of
life be within the guards of the enemy, and hath his life and corporal
liberty given him, on condition to be subject to the victor, he hath
liberty to accept the condition; and having accepted it, is the subject
of him that took him; because he had no other way to preserve himself.
The case is the same, if he be detained on the same terms, in a foreign
country. But if a man be held in prison, or bonds, or is not trusted
with the liberty of his body; he cannot be understood to be bound by
covenant to subjection; and therefore may, if he can, make his escape by
any means whatsoever.

[Sidenote: In case the sovereign cast off the government from himself
           and his heirs.]

If a monarch shall relinquish the sovereignty, both for himself, and his
heirs; his subjects return to the absolute liberty of nature; because,
though nature may declare who are his sons, and who are the nearest of
his kin; yet it dependeth on his own will, as hath been said in the
precedent chapter, who shall be his heir. If therefore he will have no
heir, there is no sovereignty, nor subjection. The case is the same, if
he die without known kindred, and without declaration of his heir. For
then there can no heir be known, and consequently no subjection be due.

[Sidenote: In case of banishment.]

If the sovereign banish his subject; during the banishment, he is not
subject. But he that is sent on a message, or hath leave to travel, is
still subject; but it is, by contract between sovereigns, not by virtue
of the covenant of subjection. For whosoever entereth into another’s
dominion, is subject to all the laws thereof; unless he have a privilege
by the amity of the sovereigns, or by special licence.

[Sidenote: In case the sovereign render himself subject to another.]

If a monarch subdued by war, render himself subject to the victor; his
subjects are delivered from their former obligation, and become obliged
to the victor. But if he be held prisoner, or have not the liberty of
his own body; he is not understood to have given away the right of
sovereignty; and therefore his subjects are obliged to yield obedience
to the magistrates formerly placed, governing not in their own name, but
in his. For, his right remaining, the question is only of the
administration; that is to say, of the magistrates and officers; which,
if he have not means to name, he is supposed to approve those, which he
himself had formerly appointed.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXII.

              OF SYSTEMS SUBJECT, POLITICAL, AND PRIVATE.


[Sidenote: The divers sorts of systems of people.]

Having spoken of the generation, form, and power of a commonwealth, I am
in order to speak next of the parts thereof. And first of systems, which
resemble the similar parts, or muscles of a body natural. By SYSTEMS, I
understand any numbers of men joined in one interest, or one business.
Of which, some are _regular_, and some _irregular_. _Regular_ are those,
where one man, or assembly of men, is constituted representative of the
whole number. All other are _irregular_.

Of regular, some are _absolute_, and _independent_, subject to none but
their own representative: such are only commonwealths; of which I have
spoken already in the five last precedent chapters. Others are
dependent; that is to say, subordinate to some sovereign power, to which
every one, as also their representative is _subject_.

Of systems subordinate, some are _political_, and some _private_.
_Political_, otherwise called _bodies politic_, and _persons in law_,
are those, which are made by authority from the sovereign power of the
commonwealth. _Private_, are those, which are constituted by subjects
amongst themselves, or by authority from a stranger. For no authority
derived from foreign power, within the dominion of another, is public
there, but private.

And of private systems, some are _lawful_; some _unlawful_. _Lawful_,
are those which are allowed by the commonwealth: all other are
_unlawful_. _Irregular_ systems, are those which having no
representative, consist only in concourse of people; which if not
forbidden by the commonwealth, nor made on evil design, such as are
conflux of people to markets, or shows, or any other harmless end, are
lawful. But when the intention is evil, or (if the number be
considerable), unknown, they are unlawful.

[Sidenote: In all bodies politic the power of the representative is
           limited.]

In bodies politic, the power of the representative is always limited:
and that which prescribeth the limits thereof, is the power sovereign.
For power unlimited, is absolute sovereignty. And the sovereign in every
commonwealth, is the absolute representative of all the subjects; and
therefore no other can be representative of any part of them, but so far
forth, as he shall give leave. And to give leave to a body politic of
subjects, to have an absolute representative to all intents and
purposes, were to abandon the government of so much of the commonwealth,
and to divide the dominion, contrary to their peace and defence; which
the sovereign cannot be understood to do, by any grant, that does not
plainly, and directly discharge them of their subjection. For
consequences of words, are not the signs of his will, when other
consequences are signs of the contrary; but rather signs of error, and
misreckoning; to which all mankind is too prone.

The bounds of that power, which is given to the representative of a body
politic, are to be taken notice of, from two things. One is their writ,
or letters from the sovereign: the other is the law of the commonwealth.

[Sidenote: By letters patent:]

For though in the institution or acquisition of a commonwealth, which is
independent, there needs no writing, because the power of the
representative has there no other bounds, but such as are set out by the
unwritten law of nature; yet in subordinate bodies, there are such
diversities of limitation necessary, concerning their businesses, times,
and places, as can neither be remembered without letters, nor taken
notice of, unless such letters be patent, that they may be read to them,
and withal sealed, or testified, with the seals, or other permanent
signs of the authority sovereign.

[Sidenote: And the laws.]

And because such limitation is not always easy, or perhaps possible to
be described in writing; the ordinary laws, common to all subjects, must
determine what the representative may lawfully do, in all cases, where
the letters themselves are silent. And therefore,

[Sidenote: When the representative is one man, his unwarranted acts are
           his own only.]

In a body politic, if the representative be one man, whatsoever he does
in the person of the body, which is not warranted in his letters, nor by
the laws, is his own act, and not the act of the body, nor of any other
member thereof besides himself: because further than his letters, or the
laws limit, he representeth no man’s person, but his own. But what he
does according to these, is the act of every one: for of the act of the
sovereign every one is author, because he is their representative
unlimited; and the act of him that recedes not from the letters of the
sovereign, is the act of the sovereign, and therefore every member of
the body is author of it.

[Sidenote: When it is an assembly, it is the act of them that assented
           only.]

But if the representative be an assembly; whatsoever that assembly shall
decree, not warranted by their letters, or the laws, is the act of the
assembly, or body politic, and the act of every one by whose vote the
decree was made; but not the act of any man that being present voted to
the contrary; nor of any man absent, unless he voted it by procuration.
It is the act of the assembly, because voted by the major part; and if
it be a crime, the assembly may be punished, as far forth as it is
capable, as by dissolution, or forfeiture of their letters (which is to
such artificial, and fictitious bodies, capital) or, if the assembly
have a common stock, wherein none of the innocent members have
propriety, by pecuniary mulct. For from corporal penalties nature hath
exempted all bodies politic. But they that gave not their vote, are
therefore innocent, because the assembly cannot represent any man in
things unwarranted by their letters, and consequently are not involved
in their votes.

[Sidenote: When the representative is one man, if he borrow money, or
           owe it, by contract, he is liable only, the members not.]

If the person of the body politic being in one man, borrow money of a
stranger, that is, of one that is not of the same body, (for no letters
need limit borrowing, seeing it is left to men’s own inclinations to
limit lending), the debt is the representative’s. For if he should have
authority from his letters, to make the members pay what he borroweth,
he should have by consequence the sovereignty of them; and therefore the
grant were either void, as proceeding from error, commonly incident to
human nature, and an insufficient sign of the will of the granter; or if
it be avowed by him, then is the representer sovereign, and falleth not
under the present question, which is only of bodies subordinate. No
member therefore is obliged to pay the debt so borrowed, but the
representative himself: because he that lendeth it, being a stranger to
the letters, and to the qualification of the body, understandeth those
only for his debtors, that are engaged: and seeing the representer can
engage himself, and none else, has him only for debtor; who must
therefore pay him, out of the common stock, if there be any, or, if
there be none, out of his own estate.

If he come into debt by contract, or mulct, the case is the same.

[Sidenote: When it is an assembly, they only are liable that have
           assented.]

But when the representative is an assembly, and the debt to a stranger;
all they, and only they are responsible for the debt, that gave their
votes to the borrowing of it, or to the contract that made it due, or to
the fact for which the mulct was imposed; because every one of those in
voting did engage himself for the payment: for he that is author of the
borrowing, is obliged to the payment, even of the whole debt; though
when paid by any one, he be discharged.

[Sidenote: If the debt be to one of the assembly, the body only is
           obliged.]

But if the debt be to one of the assembly, the assembly only is obliged
to the payment, out of their common stock, if they have any: for having
liberty of vote, if he vote the money shall be borrowed, he votes it
shall be paid; if he vote it shall not be borrowed, or be absent, yet
because in lending, he voteth the borrowing, he contradicteth his former
vote, and is obliged by the latter, and becomes both borrower and
lender, and consequently cannot demand payment from any particular man,
but from the common treasure only; which failing he hath no remedy, nor
complaint, but against himself, that being privy to the acts of the
assembly, and to their means to pay, and not being enforced, did
nevertheless through his own folly lend his money.

[Sidenote: Protestation against the decrees of bodies politic
           sometimes lawful, but against sovereign power never.]

It is manifest by this, that in bodies politic subordinate, and subject
to a sovereign power, it is sometimes not only lawful, but expedient,
for a particular man to make open protestation against the decrees of
the representative assembly, and cause their dissent to be registered,
or to take witness of it; because otherwise they may be obliged to pay
debts contracted, and be responsible for crimes committed by other men.
But in a sovereign assembly, that liberty is taken away, both because he
that protesteth there, denies their sovereignty; and also because
whatsoever is commanded by the sovereign power, is as to the subject,
though not so always in the sight of God, justified by the command: for
of such command every subject is the author.

[Sidenote: Bodies politic for government of a province, colony, or town]

The variety of bodies politic, is almost infinite: for they are not only
distinguished by the several affairs, for which they are constituted,
wherein there is an unspeakable diversity; but also by the times,
places, and numbers, subject to many limitations. And as to their
affairs, some are ordained for government; as first, the government of a
province may be committed to an assembly of men, wherein all resolutions
shall depend on the votes of the major part; and then this assembly is a
body politic, and their power limited by commission. This word province
signifies a charge, or care of business, which he whose business it is,
committeth to another man, to be administered for, and under him; and
therefore when in one commonwealth there be divers countries, that have
their laws distinct one from another, or are far distant in place, the
administration of the government being committed to divers persons,
those countries where the sovereign is not resident, but governs by
commission, are called provinces. But of the government of a province,
by an assembly residing in the province itself, there be few examples.
The Romans who had the sovereignty of many provinces; yet governed them
always by presidents, and prætors; and not by assemblies, as they
governed the city of Rome, and territories adjacent. In like manner,
when there were colonies sent from England, to plant Virginia, and
Sommer-islands; though the governments of them here, were committed to
assemblies in London, yet did those assemblies never commit the
government under them to any assembly there, but did to each plantation
send one governor. For though every man, where he can be present by
nature, desires to participate of government; yet where they cannot be
present, they are by nature also inclined, to commit the government of
their common interest rather to a monarchical, than a popular form of
government: which is also evident in those men that have great private
estates; who when they are unwilling to take the pains of administering
the business that belongs to them, chuse rather to trust one servant,
than an assembly either of their friends or servants. But howsoever it
be in fact, yet we may suppose the government of a province, or colony
committed to an assembly: and when it is, that which in this place I
have to say, is this; that whatsoever debt is by that assembly
contracted; or whatsoever unlawful act is decreed, is the act only of
those that assented, and not of any that dissented, or were absent, for
the reasons before alleged. Also that an assembly residing out of the
bounds of that colony whereof they have the government, cannot execute
any power over the persons, or goods of any of the colony, to seize on
them for debt, or other duty, in any place without the colony itself, as
having no jurisdiction, nor authority elsewhere, but are left to the
remedy, which the law of the place alloweth them. And though the
assembly have right, to impose a mulct upon any of their members, that
shall break the laws they make; yet out of the colony itself, they have
no right to execute the same. And that which is said here, of the rights
of an assembly, for the government of a province, or a colony, is
appliable also to an assembly for the government of a town, an
university, or a college, or a church, or for any other government over
the persons of men.

And generally, in all bodies politic, if any particular member conceive
himself injured by the body itself, the cognizance of his cause
belongeth to the sovereign, and those the sovereign hath ordained for
judges in such causes, or shall ordain for that particular cause; and
not to the body itself. For the whole body is in this case his
fellow-subject, which in a sovereign assembly, is otherwise: for there,
if the sovereign be not judge, though in his own cause, there can be no
judge at all.

[Sidenote: Bodies politic for ordering of trade.]

In a body politic, for the well ordering of foreign traffic, the most
commodious representative is an assembly of all the members; that is to
say, such a one, as every one that adventureth his money, may be present
at all the deliberations, and resolutions of the body, if they will
themselves. For proof whereof, we are to consider the end, for which men
that are merchants, and may buy and sell, export, and import their
merchandize, according to their own discretions, do nevertheless bind
themselves up in one corporation. It is true, there be few merchants,
that with the merchandize they buy at home, can freight a ship, to
export it; or with that they buy abroad, to bring it home; and have
therefore need to join together in one society; where every man may
either participate of the gain, according to the proportion of his
adventure; or take his own, and sell what he transports, or imports, at
such prices as he thinks fit. But this is no body politic, there being
no common representative to oblige them to any other law, than that
which is common to all other subjects. The end of their incorporating,
is to make their gain the greater; which is done two ways; by sole
buying, and sole selling, both at home, and abroad. So that to grant to
a company of merchants to be a corporation, or body politic, is to grant
them a double monopoly, whereof one is to be sole buyers; another to be
sole sellers. For when there is a company incorporate for any particular
foreign country, they only export the commodities vendible in that
country; which is sole buying at home, and sole selling abroad. For at
home there is but one buyer, and abroad but one that selleth: both which
is gainful to the merchant, because thereby they buy at home at lower,
and sell abroad at higher rates: and abroad there is but one buyer of
foreign merchandize, and but one that sells them at home; both which
again are gainful to the adventurers.

Of this double monopoly one part is disadvantageous to the people at
home, the other to foreigners. For at home by their sole exportation
they set what price they please on the husbandry, and handy-works of the
people; and by the sole importation, what price they please on all
foreign commodities the people have need of; both which are ill for the
people. On the contrary, by the sole selling of the native commodities
abroad, and sole buying the foreign commodities upon the place, they
raise the price of those, and abate the price of these, to the
disadvantage of the foreigner: for where but one selleth, the
merchandize is the dearer; and where but one buyeth, the cheaper. Such
corporations therefore are no other than monopolies; though they would
be very profitable for a commonwealth, if being bound up into one body
in foreign markets they were at liberty at home, every man to buy, and
sell at what price he could.

The end then of these bodies of merchants, being not a common benefit to
the whole body, which have in this case no common stock, but what is
deducted out of the particular adventures, for building, buying,
victualling and manning of ships, but the particular gain of every
adventurer, it is reason that every one be acquainted with the
employment of his own; that is, that every one be of the assembly, that
shall have the power to order the same; and be acquainted with their
accounts. And therefore the representative of such a body must be an
assembly, where every member of the body may be present at the
consultations, if he will.

If a body politic of merchants, contract a debt to a stranger by the act
of their representative assembly, every member is liable by himself for
the whole. For a stranger can take no notice of their private laws, but
considereth them as so many particular men, obliged every one to the
whole payment, till payment made by one dischargeth all the rest: but if
the debt be to one of the company, the creditor is debtor for the whole
to himself, and cannot therefore demand his debt, but only from the
common stock, if there be any.

If the commonwealth impose a tax upon the body, it is understood to be
laid upon every member proportionably to his particular adventure in the
company. For there is in this case no other common stock, but what is
made of their particular adventures.

If a mulct be laid upon the body for some unlawful act, they only are
liable by whose votes the act was decreed, or by whose assistance it was
executed; for in none of the rest is there any other crime but being of
the body; which if a crime, because the body was ordained by the
authority of the commonwealth, is not his.

If one of the members be indebted to the body, he may be sued by the
body; but his goods cannot be taken, nor his person imprisoned by the
authority of the body; but only by authority of the commonwealth: for if
they can do it by their own authority, they can by their own authority
give judgment that the debt is due; which is as much as to be judge in
their own cause.

[Sidenote: A body politic for counsel to be given to the sovereign.]

Those bodies made for the government of men, or of traffic, be either
perpetual, or for a time prescribed by writing. But there be bodies also
whose times are limited, and that only by the nature of their business.
For example, if a sovereign monarch, or a sovereign assembly, shall
think fit to give command to the towns, and other several parts of their
territory, to send to him their deputies, to inform him of the
condition, and necessities of the subjects, or to advise with him for
the making of good laws, or for any other cause, as with one person
representing the whole country, such deputies, having a place and time
of meeting assigned them, are there, and at that time, a body politic,
representing every subject of that dominion; but it is only for such
matters as shall be propounded unto them by that man, or assembly, that
by the sovereign authority sent for them; and when it shall be declared
that nothing more shall be propounded, nor debated by them, the body is
dissolved. For if they were the absolute representatives of the people,
then were it the sovereign assembly; and so there would be two sovereign
assemblies, or two sovereigns, over the same people; which cannot
consist with their peace. And therefore where there is once a
sovereignty, there can be no absolute representation of the people, but
by it. And for the limits of how far such a body shall represent the
whole people, they are set forth in the writing by which they were sent
for. For the people cannot choose their deputies to other intent, than
is in the writing directed to them from their sovereign expressed.

[Sidenote: A regular private body, lawful as a family.]

Private bodies regular, and lawful, are those that are constituted
without letters, or other written authority, saving the laws common to
all other subjects. And because they be united in one person
representative, they are held for regular; such as are all families, in
which the father, or master ordereth the whole family. For he obligeth
his children, and servants, as far as the law permitteth, though not
further, because none of them are bound to obedience in those actions,
which the law hath forbidden to be done. In all other actions, during
the time they are under domestic government, they are subject to their
fathers, and masters, as to their immediate sovereigns. For the father
and master, being before the institution of commonwealth, absolute
sovereigns in their own families, they lose afterward no more of their
authority, than the law of the commonwealth taketh from them.

[Sidenote: Private bodies regular, but unlawful.]

Private bodies regular, but unlawful, are those that unite themselves
into one person representative, without any public authority at all;
such as are the corporations of beggars, thieves and gipsies, the better
to order their trade of begging and stealing; and the corporations of
men, that by authority from any foreign person, unite themselves in
another’s dominion, for the easier propagation of doctrines, and for
making a party, against the power of the commonwealth.

[Sidenote: Systems irregular, such as are private leagues.]

Irregular systems, in their nature but leagues, or sometimes mere
concourse of people, without union to any particular design, not by
obligation of one to another, but proceeding only from a similitude of
wills and inclinations, become lawful, or unlawful, according to the
lawfulness, or unlawfulness of every particular man’s design therein:
and his design is to be understood by the occasion.

The leagues of subjects, because leagues are commonly made for mutual
defence, are in a commonwealth, which is no more than a league of all
the subjects together, for the most part unnecessary, and savour of
unlawful design; and are for that cause unlawful, and go commonly by the
name of factions, or conspiracies. For a league being a connexion of men
by covenants, if there be no power given to any one man or assembly, as
in the condition of mere nature, to compel them to performance, is so
long only valid, as there ariseth no just cause of distrust: and
therefore leagues between commonwealths, over whom there is no human
power established, to keep them all in awe, are not only lawful, but
also profitable for the time they last. But leagues of the subjects of
one and the same commonwealth, where every one may obtain his right by
means of the sovereign power, are unnecessary to the maintaining of
peace and justice, and, in case the design of them be evil or unknown to
the commonwealth, unlawful. For all uniting of strength by private men,
is, if for evil intent, unjust; if for intent unknown, dangerous to the
public, and unjustly concealed.

[Sidenote: Secret cabals.]

If the sovereign power be in a great assembly, and a number of men, part
of the assembly, without authority, consult apart, to contrive the
guidance of the rest; this is a faction, or conspiracy unlawful, as
being a fraudulent seducing of the assembly for their particular
interest. But if he, whose private interest is to be debated and judged
in the assembly, make as many friends as he can; in him it is no
injustice; because in this case he is no part of the assembly. And
though he hire such friends with money, unless there be an express law
against it, yet it is not injustice. For sometimes, as men’s manners
are, justice cannot be had without money; and every man may think his
own cause just, till it be heard, and judged.

[Sidenote: Feuds of private families.]

In all commonwealths, if private men entertain more servants, than the
government of his estate, and lawful employment he has for them
requires, it is faction, and unlawful. For having the protection of the
commonwealth, he needeth not the defence of private force. And whereas
in nations not thoroughly civilized, several numerous families have
lived in continual hostility, and invaded one another with private
force; yet it is evident enough, that they have done unjustly; or else
they had no commonwealth.

[Sidenote: Factions for government.]

And as factions for kindred, so also factions for government of
religion, as of Papists, Protestants, &c. or of state, as patricians,
and plebeians of old time in Rome, and of aristocraticals and
democraticals of old time in Greece, are unjust, as being contrary to
the peace and safety of the people, and a taking of the sword out of the
hand of the sovereign.

[Sidenote: Concourse of people.]

Concourse of people is an irregular system, the lawfulness, or
unlawfulness, whereof dependeth on the occasion, and on the number of
them that are assembled. If the occasion be lawful, and manifest, the
concourse is lawful; as the usual meeting of men at church, or at a
public show, in usual numbers: for if the numbers be extraordinarily
great, the occasion is not evident; and consequently he that cannot
render a particular and good account of his being amongst them, is to be
judged conscious of an unlawful, and tumultuous design. It may be lawful
for a thousand men, to join to a petition to be delivered to a judge, or
magistrate; yet if a thousand men come to present it, it is a tumultuous
assembly; because there needs but one or two for that purpose. But in
such cases as these, it is not a set number that makes the assembly
unlawful, but such a number, as the present officers are not able to
suppress, and bring to justice.

[Sidenote: Concourse of people.]

When an unusual number of men, assemble against a man whom they accuse;
the assembly is an unlawful tumult; because they may deliver their
accusation to the magistrate by a few, or by one man. Such was the case
of St. Paul at Ephesus; where Demetrius and a great number of other men,
brought two of Paul’s companions before the magistrate, saying with one
voice, _Great is Diana of the Ephesians_; which was their way of
demanding justice against them for teaching the people such doctrine, as
was against their religion, and trade. The occasion here, considering
the laws of that people, was just; yet was their assembly judged
unlawful, and the magistrate reprehended them for it in these words
(_Acts_ xix. 38-40.) _If Demetrius and the other workmen can accuse any
man, of any thing, there be pleas, and deputies, let them accuse one
another. And if you have any other thing to demand, your case may be
judged in an assembly lawfully called. For we are in danger to be
accused for this day’s sedition; because there is no cause by which any
man can render any reason of this concourse of people._ Where he calleth
an assembly, whereof men can give no just account, a sedition, and such
as they could not answer for. And this is all I shall say concerning
_systems_, and assemblies of people, which may be compared, as I said,
to the similar parts of man’s body; such as be lawful, to the muscles;
such as are unlawful, to wens, biles, and apostems, engendered by the
unnatural conflux of evil humours.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXIII.

                  OF THE PUBLIC MINISTERS OF SOVEREIGN
                                 POWER.


In the last chapter I have spoken of the similar parts of a
commonwealth: in this I shall speak of the parts organical, which are
public ministers.

[Sidenote: Public minister who.]

A PUBLIC MINISTER, is he, that by the sovereign, whether a monarch or an
assembly, is employed in any affairs, with authority to represent in
that employment, the person of the commonwealth. And whereas every man,
or assembly that hath sovereignty, representeth two persons, or, as the
more common phrase is, has two capacities, one natural, and another
politic: as a monarch, hath the person not only of the commonwealth, but
also of a man; and a sovereign assembly hath the person not only of the
commonwealth, but also of the assembly: they that be servants to them in
their natural capacity, are not public ministers; but those only that
serve them in the administration of the public business. And therefore
neither ushers, nor sergeants, nor other officers that wait on the
assembly, for no other purpose, but for the commodity of the men
assembled, in an aristocracy, or democracy; nor stewards, chamberlains,
cofferers, or any other officers of the household of a monarch, are
public ministers in a monarchy.

[Sidenote: Ministers for the general administration.]

Of public ministers, some have charge committed to them of a general
administration, either of the whole dominion, or of a part thereof. Of
the whole, as to a protector, or regent, may be committed by the
predecessor of an infant king, during his minority, the whole
administration of his kingdom. In which case, every subject is so far
obliged to obedience, as the ordinances he shall make, and the commands
he shall give be in the king’s name, and not inconsistent with his
sovereign power. Of a part, or province; as when either a monarch, or a
sovereign assembly, shall give the general charge thereof to a governor,
lieutenant, præfect, or viceroy: and in this case also, every one of
that province is obliged to all he shall do in the name of the
sovereign, and that not incompatible with the sovereign’s right. For
such protectors, viceroys, and governors, have no other right, but what
depends on the sovereign’s will; and no commission that can be given
them, can be interpreted for a declaration of the will to transfer the
sovereignty, without express and perspicuous words to that purpose. And
this kind of public ministers resembleth the nerves, and tendons that
move the several limbs of a body natural.

[Sidenote: For special administration, as for economy.]

Others have special administration; that is to say, charges of some
special business, either at home, or abroad: as at home, first, for the
economy of a commonwealth, they that have authority concerning the
_treasure_, as tributes, impositions, rents, fines, or whatsoever public
revenue, to collect, receive, issue, or take the accounts thereof, are
public ministers: ministers, because they serve the person
representative, and can do nothing against his command, nor without his
authority: public, because they serve him in his political capacity.

Secondly, they that have authority concerning the _militia_; to have the
custody of arms, forts, ports; to levy, pay, or conduct soldiers; or to
provide for any necessary thing for the use of war, either by land or
sea, are public ministers. But a soldier without command, though he
fight for the commonwealth, does not therefore represent the person of
it; because there is none to represent it to. For every one that hath
command, represents it to them only whom he commandeth.

[Sidenote: For instruction of the people.]

They also that have authority to teach, or to enable others to teach the
people their duty to the sovereign power, and instruct them in the
knowledge of what is just, and unjust, thereby to render them more apt
to live in godliness, and in peace amongst themselves, and resist the
public enemy, are public ministers: ministers, in that they do it not by
their own authority, but by another’s; and public, because they do it,
or should do it, by no authority but that of the sovereign. The monarch,
or the sovereign assembly only hath immediate authority from God, to
teach and instruct the people; and no man but the sovereign, receiveth
his power _Dei gratiâ_ simply; that is to say, from the favour of none
but God: all other, receive theirs from the favour and providence of
God, and their sovereigns; as in a monarchy _Dei gratiâ et regis_; or
_Dei providentiâ et voluntate regis_.

[Sidenote: For judicature.]

They also to whom jurisdiction is given, are public ministers. For in
their seats of justice they represent the person of the sovereign; and
their sentence, is his sentence: for, as hath been before declared, all
judicature is essentially annexed to the sovereignty; and therefore all
other judges are but ministers of him or them that have the sovereign
power. And as controversies are of two sorts, namely of _fact_, and of
_law_; so are judgments, some of fact, some of law: and consequently in
the same controversy, there may be two judges, one of fact, another of
law.

And in both these controversies, there may arise a controversy between
the party judged, and the judge; which because they be both subjects to
the sovereign, ought in equity to be judged by men agreed on by consent
of both; for no man can be judge in his own cause. But the sovereign is
already agreed on for judge by them both, and is therefore either to
hear the cause, and determine it himself, or appoint for judge such as
they shall both agree on. And this agreement is then understood to be
made between them divers ways; as first, if the defendant be allowed to
except against such of his judges, whose interest maketh him suspect
them, (for as to the complainant, he hath already chosen his own judge),
those which he excepteth not against, are judges he himself agrees on.
Secondly, if he appeal to any other judge, he can appeal no further; for
his appeal is his choice. Thirdly, if he appeal to the sovereign
himself, and he by himself, or by delegates which the parties shall
agree on, give sentence; that sentence is final: for the defendant is
judged by his own judges, that is to say, by himself.

These properties of just and rational judicature considered, I cannot
forbear to observe the excellent constitution of the courts of justice,
established both for Common, and also for Public Pleas in England. By
Common Pleas, I mean those, where both the complainant and defendant are
subjects: and by public, which are also called Pleas of the Crown, those
where the complainant is the sovereign. For whereas there were two
orders of men, whereof one was Lords, the other Commons; the Lords had
this privilege, to have for judges in all capital crimes, none but
Lords; and of them, as many as would be present; which being ever
acknowledged as a privilege of favour, their judges were none but such
as they had themselves desired. And in all controversies, every subject,
(as also in civil controversies the Lords), had for judges, men of the
country where the matter in controversy lay; against which he might make
his exceptions, till at last twelve men without exception being agreed
on, they were judged by those twelve. So that having his own judges,
there could be nothing alleged by the party, why the sentence should not
be final. These public persons, with authority from the sovereign power,
either to instruct, or judge the people, are such members of the
commonwealth, as may fitly be compared to the organs of voice in a body
natural.

[Sidenote: For execution.]

Public ministers are also all those, that have authority from the
sovereign, to procure the execution of judgments given; to publish the
sovereign’s commands; to suppress tumults; to apprehend, and imprison
malefactors; and other acts tending to the conservation of the peace.
For every act they do by such authority, is the act of the commonwealth;
and their service, answerable to that of the hands, in a body natural.

Public ministers abroad, are those that represent the person of their
own sovereign, to foreign states. Such are ambassadors, messengers,
agents, and heralds, sent by public authority, and on public business.

But such as are sent by authority only of some private party of a
troubled state, though they be received, are neither public, nor private
ministers of the commonwealth; because none of their actions have the
commonwealth for author. Likewise, an ambassador sent from a prince, to
congratulate, condole, or to assist at a solemnity; though the authority
be public; yet because the business is private, and belonging to him in
his natural capacity; is a private person. Also if a man be sent into
another country, secretly to explore their counsels, and strength;
though both the authority, and the business be public; yet because there
is none to take notice of any person in him, but his own; he is but a
private minister; but yet a minister of the commonwealth; and may be
compared to an eye in the body natural. And those that are appointed to
receive the petitions or other informations of the people, and are as it
were the public ear, are public ministers, and represent their sovereign
in that office.

[Sidenote: Councillors without other employment than to advise are not
           public ministers.]

Neither a councillor, nor a council of state, if we consider it with no
authority of judicature or command, but only of giving advice to the
sovereign when it is required, or of offering it when it is not
required, is a public person. For the advice is addressed to the
sovereign only, whose person cannot in his own presence, be represented
to him, by another. But a body of councillors, are never without some
other authority, either of judicature, or of immediate administration:
as in a monarchy, they represent the monarch, in delivering his commands
to the public ministers: in a democracy, the council, or senate
propounds the result of their deliberations to the people, as a council;
but when they appoint judges, or hear causes, or give audience to
ambassadors, it is in the quality of a minister of the people: and in an
aristocracy, the council of state is the sovereign assembly itself; and
gives counsel to none but themselves.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXIV.

                 OF THE NUTRITION, AND PROCREATION OF A
                             COMMONWEALTH.


[Sidenote: The nourishment of a commonwealth consisteth in the
           commodities of sea and land.]

The NUTRITION of a commonwealth consisteth, in the _plenty_, and
_distribution_ of _materials_ conducing to life: in _concoction_, or
_preparation_; and, when concocted, in the _conveyance_ of it, by
convenient conduits, to the public use.

As for the plenty of matter, it is a thing limited by nature, to those
commodities, which from the two breasts of our common mother, land and
sea, God usually either freely giveth, or for labour selleth to mankind.

For the matter of this nutriment, consisting in animals, vegetals, and
minerals, God hath freely laid them before us, in or near to the face of
the earth; so as there needeth no more but the labour, and industry of
receiving them. Insomuch as plenty dependeth, next to God’s favour,
merely on the labour and industry of men.

This matter, commonly called commodities, is partly _native_, and partly
_foreign_: _native_, that which is to be had within the territory of the
commonwealth: _foreign_, that which is imported from without. And
because there is no territory under the dominion of one commonwealth,
except it be of very vast extent, that produceth all things needful for
the maintenance, and motion of the whole body; and few that produce not
some thing more than necessary; the superfluous commodities to be had
within, become no more superfluous, but supply these wants at home, by
importation of that which may be had abroad, either by exchange, or by
just war, or by labour. For a man’s labour also, is a commodity
exchangeable for benefit, as well as any other thing: and there have
been commonwealths that having no more territory, than hath served them
for habitation, have nevertheless, not only maintained, but also
encreased their power, partly by the labour of trading from one place to
another, and partly by selling the manufactures whereof the materials
were brought in from other places.

[Sidenote: And the right distribution of them.]

The distribution of the materials of this nourishment, is the
constitution of _mine_, and _thine_, and _his_; that is to say, in one
word _propriety_; and belongeth in all kinds of commonwealth to the
sovereign power. For where there is no commonwealth, there is, as hath
been already shown, a perpetual war of every man against his neighbour;
and therefore every thing is his that getteth it, and keepeth it by
force; which is neither _propriety_, nor _community_; but _uncertainty_.
Which is so evident, that even Cicero, a passionate defender of liberty,
in a public pleading, attributeth all propriety to the law civil. _Let
the civil law_, saith he, _be once abandoned, or but negligently
guarded, not to say oppressed, and there is nothing, that any man can be
sure to receive from his ancestor, or leave to his children_. And again;
_Take away the civil law, and no man knows what is his own, and what
another man’s_. Seeing therefore the introduction of _propriety_ is an
effect of commonwealth, which can do nothing but by the person that
represents it, it is the act only of the sovereign; and consisteth in
the laws, which none can make that have not the sovereign power. And
this they well knew of old, who called that Νόμος, that is to say,
_distribution_, which we call law; and defined justice, by
_distributing_ to every man _his own_.

[Sidenote: All private estates of land proceed originally from the
           arbitrary distribution of the sovereign.]

In this distribution, the first law, is for division of the land itself:
wherein the sovereign assigneth to every man a portion, according as he,
and not according as any subject, or any number of them, shall judge
agreeable to equity, and the common good. The children of Israel, were a
commonwealth in the wilderness; but wanted the commodities of the earth,
till they were masters of the Land of Promise; which afterward was
divided amongst them, not by their own discretion, but by the discretion
of Eleazar the Priest, and Joshua their General, who, when there were
twelve tribes, making them thirteen by subdivision of the tribe of
Joseph, made nevertheless but twelve portions of the land; and ordained
for the tribe of Levi no land; but assigned them the tenth part of the
whole fruits; which division was therefore arbitrary. And though a
people coming into possession of a land by war, do not always
exterminate the ancient inhabitants, as did the Jews, but leave to many,
or most, or all of them their estates; yet it is manifest they hold them
afterwards, as of the victors’ distribution; as the people of England
held all theirs of William the Conqueror.

[Sidenote: Propriety of subject excludes not the dominion of the
           sovereign, but only of another subject.]

From whence we may collect, that the propriety which a subject hath in
his lands, consisteth in a right to exclude all other subjects from the
use of them; and not to exclude their sovereign, be it an assembly, or a
monarch. For seeing the sovereign, that is to say, the commonwealth,
whose person he representeth, is understood to do nothing but in order
to the common peace and security, this distribution of lands, is to be
understood as done in order to the same: and consequently, whatsoever
distribution he shall make in prejudice thereof, is contrary to the will
of every subject, that committed his peace, and safety to his
discretion, and conscience; and therefore by the will of every one of
them, is to be reputed void. It is true, that a sovereign monarch, or
the greater part of a sovereign assembly, may ordain the doing of many
things in pursuit of their passions, contrary to their own consciences,
which is a breach of trust, and of the law of nature; but this is not
enough to authorize any subject, either to make war upon, or so much as
to accuse of injustice, or any way to speak evil of their sovereign;
because they have authorized all his actions, and in bestowing the
sovereign power, made them their own. But in what cases the commands of
sovereigns are contrary to equity, and the law of nature, is to be
considered hereafter in another place.

[Sidenote: The public is not to be dieted.]

In the distribution of land, the commonwealth itself, may be conceived
to have a portion, and possess, and improve the same by their
representative; and that such portion may be made sufficient, to sustain
the whole expense to the common peace, and defence necessarily required.
Which were very true, if there could be any representative conceived
free from human passions, and infirmities. But the nature of men being
as it is, the setting forth of public land, or of any certain revenue
for the commonwealth, is in vain; and tendeth to the dissolution of
government, and to the condition of mere nature, and war, as soon as
ever the sovereign power falleth into the hands of a monarch, or of an
assembly, that are either too negligent of money, or too hazardous in
engaging the public stock into a long or costly war. Commonwealths can
endure no diet: for seeing their expense is not limited by their own
appetite, but by external accidents, and the appetites of their
neighbours, the public riches cannot be limited by other limits, than
those which the emergent occasions shall require. And whereas in
England, there were by the Conqueror, divers lands reserved to his own
use, besides forests and chases, either for his recreation, or
preservation of woods, and divers services reserved on the land he gave
his subjects; yet it seems they were not reserved for his maintenance in
his public, but in his natural capacity. For he, and his successors did
for all that, lay arbitrary taxes on all subjects’ land, when they
judged it necessary. Or if those public lands, and services, were
ordained as a sufficient maintenance of the commonwealth, it was
contrary to the scope of the institution; being, as it appeared by those
ensuing taxes, insufficient, and, as it appears by the late small
revenue of the crown, subject to alienation and diminution. It is
therefore in vain, to assign a portion to the commonwealth; which may
sell, or give it away; and does sell and give it away, when it is done
by their representative.

[Sidenote: The places and matter of traffic depend, as their
           distribution, on the sovereign.]

As the distribution of lands at home; so also to assign in what places,
and for what commodities, the subject shall traffic abroad, belongeth to
the sovereign. For if it did belong to private persons to use their own
discretion therein, some of them would be drawn for gain, both to
furnish the enemy with means to hurt the commonwealth, and hurt it
themselves, by importing such things, as pleasing men’s appetites, be
nevertheless noxious, or at least unprofitable to them. And therefore it
belongeth to the commonwealth, that is, to the sovereign only, to
approve, or disapprove both of the places, and matter of foreign
traffic.

[Sidenote: The laws of transferring propriety belong also to the
           sovereign.]

Further, seeing it is not enough to the sustentation of a commonwealth,
that every man have a propriety in a portion of land, or in some few
commodities, or a natural property in some useful art, and there is no
art in the world, but is necessary either for the being, or well being
almost of every particular man; it is necessary, that men distribute
that which they can spare, and transfer their propriety therein,
mutually one to another, by exchange, and mutual contract. And therefore
it belongeth to the commonwealth, that is to say, to the sovereign, to
appoint in what manner all kinds of contract between subjects, as
buying, selling, exchanging, borrowing, lending, letting, and taking to
hire, are to be made; and by what words and signs they shall be
understood for valid. And for the matter, and distribution of the
nourishment, to the several members of the commonwealth, thus much,
considering the model of the whole work, is sufficient.

[Sidenote: Money the blood of a commonwealth.]

By concoction, I understand the reducing of all commodities, which are
not presently consumed, but reserved for nourishment in time to come, to
something of equal value, and withal so portable, as not to hinder the
motion of men from place to place; to the end a man may have in what
place soever, such nourishment as the place affordeth. And this is
nothing else but gold, and silver, and money. For gold and silver,
being, as it happens, almost in all countries of the world highly
valued, is a commodious measure of the value of all things else between
nations; and money, of what matter soever coined by the sovereign of a
commonwealth, is a sufficient measure of the value of all things else,
between the subjects of that commonwealth. By the means of which
measures, all commodities, moveable and immoveable, are made to
accompany a man to all places of his resort, within and without the
place of his ordinary residence; and the same passeth from man to man,
within the commonwealth; and goes round about, nourishing, as it
passeth, every part thereof; in so much as this concoction, is as it
were the sanguification of the commonwealth: for natural blood is in
like manner made of the fruits of the earth; and circulating, nourisheth
by the way every member of the body of man.

And because silver and gold have their value from the matter itself;
they have first this privilege, that the value of them cannot be altered
by the power of one, nor of a few commonwealths; as being a common
measure of the commodities of all places. But base money, may easily be
enhanced, or abased. Secondly, they have the privilege to make
commonwealths move, and stretch out their arms, when need is, into
foreign countries: and supply, not only private subjects that travel,
but also whole armies with provision. But that coin, which is not
considerable for the matter, but for the stamp of the place, being
unable to endure change of air, hath its effect at home only; where also
it is subject to the change of laws, and thereby to have the value
diminished, to the prejudice many times of those that have it.

[Sidenote: The conduits and way of money to the public use.]

The conduits, and ways by which it is conveyed to the public use, are of
two sorts: one, that conveyeth it to the public coffers; the other, that
issueth the same out again for public payments. Of the first sort, are
collectors, receivers, and treasurers; of the second, are the treasurers
again, and the officers appointed for payment of several public or
private ministers. And in this also, the artificial man maintains his
resemblance with the natural; whose veins receiving the blood from the
several parts of the body, carry it to the heart; where being made
vital, the heart by the arteries sends it out again, to enliven, and
enable for motion all the members of the same.

[Sidenote: The children of a commonwealth colonies.]

The procreation or children of a commonwealth, are those we call
_plantations_, or _colonies_; which are numbers of men sent out from the
commonwealth, under a conductor, or governor, to inhabit a foreign
country, either formerly void of inhabitants, or made void then by war.
And when a colony is settled, they are either a commonwealth of
themselves, discharged of their subjection to their sovereign that sent
them, as hath been done by many commonwealths, of ancient time, in which
case the commonwealth from which they went, was called their metropolis
or mother, and requires no more of them, than fathers require of the
children, whom they emancipate and make free from their domestic
government, which is honour, and friendship; or else they remain united
to their metropolis, as were the colonies of the people of Rome; and
then they are no commonwealths themselves, but provinces, and parts of
the commonwealth that sent them. So that the right of colonies, saving
honour and league with their metropolis, dependeth wholly on their
licence or letters, by which their sovereign authorized them to plant.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XXV.

                              OF COUNSEL.


[Sidenote: Counsel what.]

How fallacious it is to judge of the nature of things by the ordinary
and inconstant use of words, appeareth in nothing more, than in the
confusion of counsels, and commands, arising from the imperative manner
of speaking in them both, and in many other occasions besides. For the
words _do this_, are the words not only of him that commandeth; but also
of him that giveth counsel; and of him that exhorteth; and yet there are
but few, that see not that these are very different things, or that
cannot distinguish between them, when they perceive who it is that
speaketh, and to whom the speech is directed, and upon what occasion.
But finding those phrases in men’s writings, and being not able, or not
willing to enter into a consideration of the circumstances, they mistake
sometimes the precepts of counsellors, for the precepts of them that
command; and sometimes the contrary; according as it best agreeth with
the conclusions they would infer, or the actions they approve. To avoid
which mistakes, and render to those terms of commanding, counselling and
exhorting, their proper and distinct significations, I define them thus.

[Sidenote: Differences between command and counsel.]

COMMAND is, where a man saith, _do this_, or _do not this_, without
expecting other reason than the will of him that says it. From this it
followeth manifestly, that he that commandeth, pretendeth thereby his
own benefit: for the reason of his command is his own will only, and the
proper object of every man’s will, is some good to himself.

COUNSEL, is where a man saith, _do_, or _do not this_, and deduceth his
reasons from the benefit that arriveth by it to him to whom he saith it.
And from this it is evident, that he that giveth counsel, pretendeth
only, whatsoever he intendeth, the good of him, to whom he giveth it.

Therefore between counsel and command, one great difference is, that
command is directed to a man’s own benefit; and counsel to the benefit
of another man. And from this ariseth another difference, that a man may
be obliged to do what he is commanded; as when he hath covenanted to
obey: but he cannot be obliged to do as he is counselled, because the
hurt of not following it, is his own; or if he should covenant to follow
it, then is the counsel turned into the nature of a command. A third
difference between them is, that no man can pretend a right to be of
another man’s counsel; because he is not to pretend benefit by it to
himself: but to demand right to counsel another, argues a will to know
his designs, or to gain some other good to himself: which, as I said
before, is of every man’s will the proper object.

This also is incident to the nature of counsel; that whatsoever it be,
he that asketh it, cannot in equity accuse, or punish it: for to ask
counsel of another, is to permit him to give such counsel as he shall
think best; and consequently, he that giveth counsel to his sovereign,
whether a monarch, or an assembly, when he asketh it, cannot in equity
be punished for it, whether the same be conformable to the opinion of
the most, or not, so it be to the proposition in debate. For if the
sense of the assembly can be taken notice of, before the debate be
ended, they should neither ask, nor take any further counsel; for the
sense of the assembly, is the resolution of the debate, and end of all
deliberation. And generally he that demandeth counsel, is author of it;
and therefore cannot punish it; and what the sovereign cannot, no man
else can. But if one subject giveth counsel to another, to do anything
contrary to the laws, whether that counsel proceed from evil intention,
or from ignorance only, it is punishable by the commonwealth; because
ignorance of the law is no good excuse, where every man is bound to take
notice of the laws to which he is subject.

[Sidenote: Exhortation and dehortation what.]

EXHORTATION and DEHORTATION is counsel, accompanied with signs in him
that giveth it, of vehement desire to have it followed: or to say it
more briefly, _counsel vehemently pressed_. For he that exhorteth, doth
not deduce the consequences of what he adviseth to be done, and tie
himself therein to the rigour of true reasoning; but encourages him he
counselleth to action: as he that dehorteth, deterreth him from it. And,
therefore, they have in their speeches, a regard to the common passions
and opinions of men, in deducing their reasons; and make use of
similitudes, metaphors, examples, and other tools of oratory, to
persuade their hearers of the utility, honour, or justice of following
their advice.

From whence may be inferred, first, that exhortation and dehortation is
directed to the good of him that giveth the counsel, not of him that
asketh it, which is contrary to the duty of a counsellor; who, by the
definition of counsel, ought to regard not his own benefit, but his whom
he adviseth. And that he directeth his counsel to his own benefit, is
manifest enough, by the long and vehement urging, or by the artificial
giving thereof; which being not required of him, and consequently
proceeding from his own occasions, is directed principally to his own
benefit, and but accidentally to the good of him that is counselled, or
not at all.

Secondly, that the use of exhortation and dehortation lieth only where a
man is to speak to a multitude; because when the speech is addressed to
one, he may interrupt him, and examine his reasons more rigorously than
can be done in a multitude; which are too many to enter into dispute,
and dialogue with him that speaketh indifferently to them all at once.

Thirdly, that they that exhort and dehort, where they are required to
give counsel, are corrupt counsellors, and as it were bribed by their
own interest. For though the counsel they give be never so good; yet he
that gives it, is no more a good counsellor, than he that giveth a just
sentence for a reward, is a just judge. But where a man may lawfully
command, as a father in his family, or a leader in an army, his
exhortations and dehortations, are not only lawful, but also necessary,
and laudable. But then they are no more counsels, but commands; which
when they are for execution of sour labour, sometimes necessity, and
always humanity requireth to be sweetened in the delivery, by
encouragement, and in the tune and phrase of counsel, rather than in
harsher language of command.

Examples of the difference between command and counsel, we may take from
the forms of speech that express them in Holy Scripture. _Have no other
Gods but me; make to thyself no graven image; take not God’s name in
vain; sanctify the sabbath; honour thy parents; kill not; steal not,
&c._ are commands; because the reason for which we are to obey them, is
drawn from the will of God our king, whom we are obliged to obey. But
these words, _Sell all thou hast; give it to the poor; and follow me_,
are counsel; because the reason for which we are to do so, is drawn from
our own benefit; which is this, that we shall have _treasure in Heaven_.
These words, _Go into the village over against you, and you shall find
an ass tied, and her colt; loose her, and bring her to me_, are a
command: for the reason of their fact is drawn from the will of their
Master: but these words, _Repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus_,
are counsel; because the reason why we should so do, tendeth not to any
benefit of God Almighty, who shall still be king in what manner soever
we rebel; but of ourselves, who have no other means of avoiding the
punishment hanging over us for our sins.

[Sidenote: Differences of fit and unfit counsellors.]

As the difference of counsel from command, hath been now deduced from
the nature of counsel, consisting in a deducing of the benefit, or hurt
that may arise to him that is to be counselled, by the necessary or
probable consequences of the action he propoundeth; so may also the
differences between _apt_ and _inept_ counsellors be derived from the
same. For experience, being but memory of the consequences of like
actions formerly observed, and counsel but the speech whereby that
experience is made known to another; the virtues, and defects of
counsel, are the same with the virtues, and defects intellectual: and to
the person of a commonwealth, his counsellors serve him in the place of
memory, and mental discourse. But with this resemblance of the
commonwealth, to a natural man, there is one dissimilitude joined, of
great importance; which is, that a natural man receiveth his experience,
from the natural objects of sense, which work upon him without passion,
or interest of their own; whereas they that give counsel to the
representative person of a commonwealth, may have, and have often their
particular ends and passions, that render their counsels always
suspected, and many times unfaithful. And therefore we may set down for
the first condition of a good counsellor, _that his ends, and interests,
be not inconsistent with the ends and interests of him he counselleth_.

Secondly, because the office of a counsellor, when an action comes into
deliberation, is to make manifest the consequences of it, in such
manner, as he that is counselled may be truly and evidently informed; he
ought to propound his advice, in such form of speech, as may make the
truth most evidently appear; that is to say, with as firm ratiocination,
as significant and proper language, and as briefly, as the evidence will
permit. And therefore _rash and unevident inferences_, such as are
fetched only from examples, or authority of books, and are not arguments
of what is good, or evil, but witnesses of fact, or of opinion;
_obscure, confused, and ambiguous expressions, also all metaphorical
speeches, tending to the stirring up of passion_, (because such
reasoning, and such expressions, are useful only to deceive, or to lead
him we counsel towards other ends than his own) _are repugnant to the
office of a counsellor_.

Thirdly, because the ability of counselling proceedeth from experience,
and long study; and no man is presumed to have experience in all those
things that to the administration of a great commonwealth are necessary
to be known, _no man is presumed to be a good counsellor, but in such
business, as he hath not only been much versed in, but hath also much
meditated on, and considered_. For seeing the business of a commonwealth
is this, to preserve the people in peace at home, and defend them
against foreign invasion, we shall find, it requires great knowledge of
the disposition of mankind, of the rights of government, and of the
nature of equity, law, justice, and honour, not to be attained without
study; and of the strength, commodities, places, both of their own
country, and their neighbours; as also of the inclinations, and designs
of all nations that may any way annoy them. And this is not attained to,
without much experience. Of which things, not only the whole sum, but
every one of the particulars requires the age, and observation of a man
in years, and of more than ordinary study. The wit required for counsel,
as I have said before (chap. VIII.) is judgment. And the differences of
men in that point come from different education, of some to one kind of
study or business, and of others to another. When for the doing of any
thing, there be infallible rules, as in engines and edifices, the rules
of geometry, all the experience of the world cannot equal his counsel,
that has learnt, or found out the rule. And when there is no such rule,
he that hath most experience in that particular kind of business, has
therein the best judgment, and is the best counsellor.

Fourthly, to be able to give counsel to a commonwealth, in a business
that hath reference to another commonwealth, _it is necessary to be
acquainted with the intelligences, and letters_ that come from thence,
_and with all the records of treaties, and other transactions of state_
between them; which none can do, but such as the representative shall
think fit. By which we may see, that they who are not called to counsel,
can have no good counsel in such cases to obtrude.

Fifthly, supposing the number of counsellors equal, a man is better
counselled by hearing them apart, than in an assembly; and that for many
causes. First, in hearing them apart, you have the advice of every man;
but in an assembly many of them deliver their advice with _aye_, or
_no_, or with their hands, or feet, not moved by their own sense, but by
the eloquence of another, or for fear of displeasing some that have
spoken, or the whole assembly, by contradiction; or for fear of
appearing duller in apprehension, than those that have applauded the
contrary opinion. Secondly, in an assembly of many, there cannot choose
but be some whose interests are contrary to that of the public; and
these their interests make passionate, and passion eloquent, and
eloquence draws others into the same advice. For the passions of men,
which asunder are moderate, as the heat of one brand; in an assembly are
like many brands, that inflame one another, especially when they blow
one another with orations, to the setting of the commonwealth on fire,
under pretence of counselling it. Thirdly, in hearing every man apart,
one may examine, when there is need, the truth, or probability of his
reasons, and of the grounds of the advice he gives, by frequent
interruptions, and objections; which cannot be done in an assembly,
where, in every difficult question, a man is rather astonied, and
dazzled with the variety of discourse upon it, than informed of the
course he ought to take. Besides, there cannot be an assembly of many,
called together for advice, wherein there be not some, that have the
ambition to be thought eloquent, and also learned in the politics; and
give not their advice with care of the business propounded, but of the
applause of their motley orations, made of the divers coloured threds,
or shreads of authors; which is an impertinence at least, that takes
away the time of serious consultation, and in the secret way of
counselling apart, is easily avoided. Fourthly, in deliberations that
ought to be kept secret, whereof there be many occasions in public
business, the counsels of many, and especially in assemblies, are
dangerous; and therefore great assemblies are necessitated to commit
such affairs to lesser numbers, and of such persons as are most versed,
and in whose fidelity they have most confidence.

To conclude, who is there that so far approves the taking of counsel
from a great assembly of counsellors, that wisheth for, or would accept
of their pains, when there is a question of marrying his children,
disposing of his lands, governing his household, or managing his private
estate, especially if there be amongst them such as wish not his
prosperity? A man that doth his business by the help of many and prudent
counsellors, with every one consulting apart in his proper element, does
it best, as he that useth able seconds at tennis play, placed in their
proper stations. He does next best, that useth his own judgment only; as
he that has no second at all. But he that is carried up and down to his
business in a framed counsel, which cannot move but by the plurality of
consenting opinions, the execution whereof is commonly, out of envy or
interest, retarded by the part dissenting, does it worst of all, and
like one that is carried to the ball, though by good players, yet in a
wheel-barrow, or other frame, heavy of itself, and retarded also by the
inconcurrent judgments, and endeavours of them that drive it; and so
much the more, as they be more that set their hands to it; and most of
all, when there is one, or more amongst them, that desire to have him
lose. And though it be true, that many eyes see more than one; yet it is
not to be understood of many counsellors; but then only, when the final
resolution is in one man. Otherwise, because many eyes see the same
thing in divers lines, and are apt to look asquint towards their private
benefit; they that desire not to miss their mark, though they look about
with two eyes, yet they never aim but with one; and therefore no great
popular commonwealth was ever kept up, but either by a foreign enemy
that united them; or by the reputation of some eminent man amongst them;
or by the secret counsel of a few; or by the mutual fear of equal
factions; and not by the open consultations of the assembly. And as for
very little commonwealths, be they popular, or monarchical, there is no
human wisdom can uphold them, longer than the jealousy lasteth of their
potent neighbours.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXVI.

                             OF CIVIL LAWS.


[Sidenote: Civil law what.]

By CIVIL LAWS, I understand the laws, that men are therefore bound to
observe, because they are members, not of this, or that commonwealth in
particular, but of a commonwealth. For the knowledge of particular laws
belongeth to them, that profess the study of the laws of their several
countries; but the knowledge of civil law in general, to any man. The
ancient law of Rome was called their _civil law_, from the word
_civitas_, which signifies a commonwealth: and those countries, which
having been under the Roman empire, and governed by that law, retain
still such part thereof as they think fit, call that part the civil law,
to distinguish it from the rest of their own civil laws. But that is not
it I intend to speak of here; my design being not to show what is law
here, and there; but what is law; as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and
divers others have done, without taking upon them the profession of the
study of the law.

And first it is manifest, that law in general, is not counsel, but
command; nor a command of any man to any man; but only of him, whose
command is addressed to one formerly obliged to obey him. And as for
civil law, it addeth only the name of the person commanding, which is
_persona civitatis_, the person of the commonwealth.

Which considered, I define civil law in this manner. CIVIL LAW, _is to
every subject, those rules, which the commonwealth hath commanded him,
by word, writing, or other sufficient sign of the will, to make use of,
for the distinction of right, and wrong; that is to say, of what is
contrary, and what is not contrary to the rule_.

In which definition, there is nothing that is not at first sight
evident. For every man seeth, that some laws are addressed to all the
subjects in general; some to particular provinces; some to particular
vocations; and some to particular men; and are therefore laws, to every
of those to whom the command is directed, and to none else. As also,
that laws are the rules of just, and unjust; nothing being reputed
unjust, that is not contrary to some law. Likewise, that none can make
laws but the commonwealth; because our subjection is to the commonwealth
only: and that commands, are to be signified by sufficient signs;
because a man knows not otherwise how to obey them. And therefore,
whatsoever can from this definition by necessary consequence be deduced,
ought to be acknowledged for truth. Now I deduce from it this that
followeth.

[Sidenote: The sovereign is legislator.]

1. The legislator in all commonwealths, is only the sovereign, be he one
man, as in a monarchy, or one assembly of men, as in a democracy, or
aristocracy. For the legislator is he that maketh the law. And the
commonwealth only prescribes, and commandeth the observation of those
rules, which we call law: therefore the commonwealth is the legislator.
But the commonwealth is no person, nor has capacity to do anything, but
by the representative, that is, the sovereign; and therefore the
sovereign is the sole legislator. For the same reason, none can abrogate
a law made, but the sovereign; because a law is not abrogated, but by
another law, that forbiddeth it to be put in execution.

[Sidenote: And not subject to civil law.]

2. The sovereign of a commonwealth, be it an assembly, or one man, is
not subject to the civil laws. For having power to make, and repeal
laws, he may when he pleaseth, free himself from that subjection, by
repealing those laws that trouble him, and making of new; and
consequently he was free before. For he is free, that can be free when
he will: nor is it possible for any person to be bound to himself;
because he that can bind, can release; and therefore he that is bound to
himself only, is not bound.

[Sidenote: Use, a law not by virtue of time, but of the sovereign’s
           consent.]

3. When long use obtaineth the authority of a law, it is not the length
of time that maketh the authority, but the will of the sovereign
signified by his silence, for silence is sometimes an argument of
consent; and it is no longer law, than the sovereign shall be silent
therein. And therefore if the sovereign shall have a question of right
grounded, not upon his present will, but upon the laws formerly made;
the length of time shall bring no prejudice to his right; but the
question shall be judged by equity. For many unjust actions, and unjust
sentences, go uncontrolled a longer time than any man can remember. And
our lawyers account no customs law, but such as are reasonable, and that
evil customs are to be abolished. But the judgment of what is
reasonable, and of what is to be abolished, belongeth to him that maketh
the law, which is the sovereign assembly, or monarch.

[Sidenote: The law of nature, and the civil law contain each other.]

4. The law of nature, and the civil law, contain each other, and are of
equal extent. For the laws of nature, which consist in equity, justice,
gratitude, and other moral virtues on these depending, in the condition
of mere nature, as I have said before in the end of the fifteenth
chapter, are not properly laws, but qualities that dispose men to peace
and obedience. When a commonwealth is once settled, then are they
actually laws, and not before; as being then the commands of the
commonwealth; and therefore also civil laws: for it is the sovereign
power that obliges men to obey them. For in the differences of private
men, to declare, what is equity, what is justice, and what is moral
virtue, and to make them binding, there is need of the ordinances of
sovereign power, and punishments to be ordained for such as shall break
them; which ordinances are therefore part of the civil law. The law of
nature therefore is a part of the civil law in all commonwealths of the
world. Reciprocally also, the civil law is a part of the dictates of
nature. For justice, that is to say, performance of covenant, and giving
to every man his own, is a dictate of the law of nature. But every
subject in a commonwealth, hath convenanted to obey the civil law;
either one with another, as when they assemble to make a common
representative, or with the representative itself one by one, when
subdued by the sword they promise obedience, that they may receive life;
and therefore obedience to the civil law is part also of the law of
nature. Civil, and natural law are not different kinds, but different
parts of law; whereof one part being written, is called civil, the other
unwritten, natural. But the right of nature, that is, the natural
liberty of man, may by the civil law be abridged, and restrained: nay,
the end of making laws, is no other, but such restraint; without the
which there cannot possibly be any peace. And law was brought into the
world for nothing else, but to limit the natural liberty of particular
men, in such manner, as they might not hurt, but assist one another, and
join together against a common enemy.

[Sidenote: Provincial laws are not made by custom, but by the sovereign
           power.]

5. If the sovereign of one commonwealth, subdue a people that have lived
under other written laws, and afterwards govern them by the same laws,
by which they were governed before; yet those laws are the civil laws of
the victor, and not of the vanquished commonwealth. For the legislator
is he, not by whose authority the laws were first made, but by whose
authority they now continue to be laws. And therefore where there be
divers provinces, within the dominion of a commonwealth, and in those
provinces diversity of laws, which commonly are called the customs of
each several province, we are not to understand that such customs have
their force, only from length of time; but that they were anciently laws
written, or otherwise made known, for the constitutions, and statutes of
their sovereigns; and are now laws, not by virtue of the prescription of
time, but by the constitutions of their present sovereigns. But if an
unwritten law, in all the provinces of a dominion, shall be generally
observed, and no iniquity appear in the use thereof; that law can be no
other but a law of nature, equally obliging all mankind.

[Sidenote: Some foolish opinions of lawyers concerning the making of
           laws.]

6. Seeing then all laws, written and unwritten, have their authority and
force, from the will of the commonwealth; that is to say, from the will
of the representative; which in a monarchy is the monarch, and in other
commonwealths the sovereign assembly; a man may wonder from whence
proceed such opinions, as are found in the books of lawyers of eminence
in several commonwealths, directly, or by consequence making the
legislative power depend on private men, or subordinate judges. As for
example, _that the common law, hath no controller but the parliament_;
which is true only where a parliament has the sovereign power, and
cannot be assembled, nor dissolved, but by their own discretion. For if
there be a right in any else to dissolve them, there is a right also to
control them, and consequently to control their controllings. And if
there be no such right, then the controller of laws is not
_parliamentum_, but _rex in parliamento_. And where a parliament is
sovereign, if it should assemble never so many, or so wise men, from the
countries subject to them, for whatsoever cause; yet there is no man
will believe, that such an assembly hath thereby acquired to themselves
a legislative power. _Item_, that the two arms of a commonwealth, are
_force and justice; the first whereof is in the king; the other
deposited in the hands of the parliament_. As if a commonwealth could
consist, where the force were in any hand, which justice had not the
authority to command and govern.

[Sidenote: Sir Edw. Coke upon Littleton, lib. 2, ch. 6, fol. 97, b.]

7. That law can never be against reason, our lawyers are agreed; and
that not the letter, that is every construction of it, but that which is
according to the intention of the legislator, is the law. And it is
true: but the doubt is of whose reason it is, that shall be received for
law. It is not meant of any private reason; for then there would be as
much contradiction in the laws, as there is in the Schools; nor yet, as
Sir Edward Coke makes it, an _artificial perfection of reason, gotten by
long study, observation, and experience_, as his was. For it is possible
long study may increase, and confirm erroneous sentences: and where men
build on false grounds, the more they build, the greater is the ruin:
and of those that study, and observe with equal time and diligence, the
reasons and resolutions are, and must remain discordant: and therefore
it is not that _juris prudentia_, or wisdom of subordinate judges; but
the reason of this our artificial man the commonwealth, and his command,
that maketh law: and the commonwealth being in their representative but
one person, there cannot easily arise any contradiction in the laws; and
when there doth, the same reason is able, by interpretation, or
alteration, to take it away. In all courts of justice, the sovereign,
which is the person of the commonwealth, is he that judgeth: the
subordinate judge, ought to have regard to the reason, which moved his
sovereign to make such law, that his sentence may be according
thereunto; which then is his sovereign’s sentence; otherwise it is his
own, and an unjust one.

[Sidenote: Law made, if not also made known, is no law.]

8. From this, that the law is a command, and a command consisteth in
declaration, or manifestation of the will of him that commandeth, by
voice, writing, or some other sufficient argument of the same, we may
understand, that the command of the commonwealth is law only to those,
that have means to take notice of it. Over natural fools, children, or
madmen, there is no law, no more than over brute beasts; nor are they
capable of the title of just, or unjust; because they had never power to
make any covenant, or to understand the consequences thereof; and
consequently never took upon them to authorize the actions of any
sovereign, as they must do that make to themselves a commonwealth. And
as those from whom nature or accident hath taken away the notice of all
laws in general; so also every man, from whom any accident, not
proceeding from his own default, hath taken away the means to take
notice of any particular law, is excused, if he observe it not: and to
speak properly, that law is no law to him. It is therefore necessary, to
consider in this place, what arguments, and signs be sufficient for the
knowledge of what is the law; that is to say, what is the will of the
sovereign, as well in monarchies, as in other forms of government.

[Sidenote: Unwritten laws are all of them laws of nature.]

And first, if it be a law that obliges all the subjects without
exception, and is not written, nor otherwise published in such places as
they may take notice thereof, it is a law of nature. For whatsoever men
are to take knowledge of for law, not upon other men’s words, but every
one from his own reason, must be such as is agreeable to the reason of
all men; which no law can be, but the law of nature. The laws of nature
therefore need not any publishing, nor proclamation; as being contained
in this one sentence, approved by all the world, _Do not that to
another, which thou thinkest unreasonable to be done by another to
thyself_.

Secondly, if it be a law that obliges only some condition of men, or one
particular man, and be not written, nor published by word, then also it
is a law of nature; and known by the same arguments, and signs, that
distinguish those in such a condition, from other subjects. For
whatsoever law is not written, or some way published by him that makes
it law, can be known no way, but by the reason of him that is to obey
it; and is therefore also a law not only civil, but natural. For
example, if the sovereign employ a public minister, without written
instructions what to do; he is obliged to take for instructions the
dictates of reason; as if he make a judge, the judge is to take notice,
that his sentence ought to be according to the reason of his sovereign,
which being always understood to be equity, he is bound to it by the law
of nature: or if an ambassador, he is, in all things not contained in
his written instructions, to take for instruction that which reason
dictates to be most conducing to his sovereign’s interest; and so of all
other ministers of the sovereignty, public and private. All which
instructions of natural reason may be comprehended under one name of
_fidelity_; which is a branch of natural justice.

The law of nature excepted, it belongeth to the essence of all other
laws, to be made known, to every man that shall be obliged to obey them,
either by word, or writing, or some other act, known to proceed from the
sovereign authority. For the will of another cannot be understood, but
by his own word, or act, or by conjecture taken from his scope and
purpose; which in the person of the commonwealth, is to be supposed
always consonant to equity and reason. And in ancient time, before
letters were in common use, the laws were many times put into verse;
that the rude people taking pleasure in singing, or reciting them, might
the more easily retain them in memory. And for the same reason Solomon
(_Prov._ vii. 3) adviseth a man, to bind the ten commandments upon his
ten fingers. And for the law which Moses gave to the people of Israel at
the renewing of the covenant (_Deut._ xi. 19), he biddeth them to teach
it their children, by discoursing of it both at home, and upon the way;
at going to bed, and at rising from bed; and to write it upon the posts,
and doors of their houses; and (_Deut._ xxxi. 12) to assemble the
people, man, woman, and child, to hear it read.

[Sidenote: Nothing is law where the legislator cannot be known.]

Nor is it enough the law be written, and published; but also that there
be manifest signs, that it proceedeth from the will of the sovereign.
For private men, when they have, or think they have force enough to
secure their unjust designs, and convoy them safely to their ambitious
ends, may publish for laws what they please, without, or against the
legislative authority. There is therefore requisite, not only a
declaration of the law, but also sufficient signs of the author and
authority. The author, or legislator is supposed in every commonwealth
to be evident, because he is the sovereign, who having been constituted
by the consent of every one, is supposed by every one to be sufficiently
known. And though the ignorance and security of men be such, for the
most part, as that when the memory of the first constitution of their
commonwealth is worn out, they do not consider, by whose power they used
to be defended against their enemies, and to have their industry
protected, and to be righted when injury is done them; yet because no
man that considers, can make question of it, no excuse can be derived
from the ignorance of where the sovereignty is placed. And it is a
dictate of natural reason, and consequently an evident law of nature,
that no man ought to weaken that power, the protection whereof he hath
himself demanded, or wittingly received against others. Therefore of who
is sovereign, no man, but by his own fault, (whatsoever evil men
suggest,) can make any doubt. [Sidenote: Difference between verifying &
authorizing.] The difficulty consisteth in the evidence of the authority
derived from him; the removing whereof, dependeth on the knowledge of
the public registers, public counsels, public ministers, and public
seals; by which all laws are sufficiently verified; verified, I say, not
authorized: for the verification, is but the testimony and record, not
the authority of the law; which consisteth in the command of the
sovereign only.

[Sidenote: The law verified by the subordinate judge.]

If therefore a man have a question of injury, depending on the law of
nature; that is to say, on common equity; the sentence of the judge,
that by commission hath authority to take cognizance of such causes, is
a sufficient verification of the law of nature in that individual case.
For though the advice of one that professeth the study of the law, be
useful for the avoiding of contention; yet it is but advice: it is the
judge must tell men what is law, upon the hearing of the controversy.

[Sidenote: By the public registers.]

But when the question is of injury, or crime, upon a written law; every
man by recourse to the registers, by himself or others, may, if he will,
be sufficiently informed, before he do such injury, or commit the crime,
whether it be an injury, or not: nay he ought to do so: for when a man
doubts whether the act he goeth about, be just, or unjust; and may
inform himself, if he will; the doing is unlawful. In like manner, he
that supposeth himself injured, in a case determined by the written law,
which he may, by himself or others, see and consider; if he complain
before he consults with the law, he does unjustly, and bewrayeth a
disposition rather to vex other men, than to demand his own right.

[Sidenote: By letters patent and public seal.]

If the question be of obedience to a public officer; to have seen his
commission, with the public seal, and heard it read; or to have had the
means to be informed of it, if a man would, is a sufficient verification
of his authority. For every man is obliged to do his best endeavour, to
inform himself of all written laws, that may concern his own future
actions.

[Sidenote: The interpretation of the law dependeth on the sovereign
           power.]

The legislator known; and the laws, either by writing, or by the light
of nature, sufficiently published; there wanteth yet another very
material circumstance to make them obligatory. For it is not the letter,
but the intendment, or meaning, that is to say, the authentic
interpretation of the law (which is the sense of the legislator), in
which the nature of the law consisteth; and therefore the interpretation
of all laws dependeth on the authority sovereign; and the interpreters
can be none but those, which the sovereign, to whom only the subject
oweth obedience, shall appoint. For else, by the craft of an
interpreter, the law may be made to bear a sense, contrary to that of
the sovereign: by which means the interpreter becomes the legislator.

[Sidenote: All laws need interpretation.]

All laws, written, and unwritten, have need of interpretation. The
unwritten law of nature, though it be easy to such, as without
partiality and passion, make use of their natural reason, and therefore
leaves the violators thereof without excuse; yet considering there be
very few, perhaps none, that in some cases are not blinded by self-love,
or some other passion; it is now become of all laws the most obscure,
and has consequently the greatest need of able interpreters. The written
laws, if they be short, are easily misinterpreted, from the divers
significations of a word, or two: if long, they be more obscure by the
divers significations of many words: insomuch as no written law,
delivered in few, or many words, can be well understood, without a
perfect understanding of the final causes, for which the law was made;
the knowledge of which final causes is in the legislator. To him
therefore there cannot be any knot in the law, insoluble; either by
finding out the ends, to undo it by; or else by making what ends he
will, as Alexander did with his sword in the Gordian knot, by the
legislative power; which no other interpreter can do.

[Sidenote: The authentical interpretation of law is not that of
           writers.]

The interpretation of the laws of nature, in a commonwealth, dependeth
not on the books of moral philosophy. The authority of writers, without
the authority of the commonwealth, maketh not their opinions law, be
they never so true. That which I have written in this treatise,
concerning the moral virtues, and of their necessity for the procuring,
and maintaining peace, though it be evident truth, is not therefore
presently law; but because in all commonwealths in the world, it is part
of the civil law. For though it be naturally reasonable; yet it is by
the sovereign power that it is law: otherwise, it were a great error, to
call the laws of nature unwritten law; whereof we see so many volumes
published, and in them so many contradictions of one another, and of
themselves.

[Sidenote: The interpreter of the law is the judge giving sentence viva
           voce in every particular case.]

The interpretation of the law of nature, is the sentence of the judge
constituted by the sovereign authority, to hear and determine such
controversies, as depend thereon; and consisteth in the application of
the law to the present case. For in the act of judicature, the judge
doth no more but consider, whether the demand of the party, be consonant
to natural reason, and equity; and the sentence he giveth, is therefore
the interpretation of the law of nature; which interpretation is
authentic; not because it is his private sentence; but because he giveth
it by authority of the sovereign, whereby it becomes the sovereign’s
sentence; which is law for that time, to the parties pleading.

[Sidenote: The sentence of a judge does not bind him, or another judge
           to give like sentence in like cases ever after.]

But because there is no judge subordinate, nor sovereign, but may err in
a judgment of equity; if afterward in another like case he find it more
consonant to equity to give a contrary sentence, he is obliged to do it.
No man’s error becomes his own law; nor obliges him to persist in it.
Neither, for the same reason, becomes it a law to other judges, though
sworn to follow it. For though a wrong sentence given by authority of
the sovereign, if he know and allow it, in such laws as are mutable, be
a constitution of a new law, in cases, in which every little
circumstance is the same; yet in laws immutable, such as are the laws of
nature, they are no laws to the same or other judges, in the like cases
for ever after. Princes succeed one another; and one judge passeth,
another cometh; nay, heaven and earth shall pass; but not one tittle of
the law of nature shall pass; for it is the eternal law of God.
Therefore all the sentences of precedent judges that have ever been,
cannot altogether make a law contrary to natural equity: nor any
examples of former judges, can warrant an unreasonable sentence, or
discharge the present judge of the trouble of studying what is equity,
in the case he is to judge, from the principles of his own natural
reason. For example sake, it is against the law of nature, _to punish
the innocent_; and innocent is he that acquitteth himself judicially,
and is acknowledged for innocent by the judge. Put the case now, that a
man is accused of a capital crime, and seeing the power and malice of
some enemy, and the frequent corruption and partiality of judges,
runneth away for fear of the event, and afterwards is taken, and brought
to a legal trial, and maketh it sufficiently appear, he was not guilty
of the crime, and being thereof acquitted, is nevertheless condemned to
lose his goods; this is a manifest condemnation of the innocent. I say
therefore, that there is no place in the world, where this can be an
interpretation of a law of nature, or be made a law by the sentences of
precedent judges, that had done the same. For he that judged it first,
judged unjustly; and no injustice can be a pattern of judgment to
succeeding judges. A written law may forbid innocent men to fly, and
they may be punished for flying: but that flying for fear of injury,
should be taken for presumption of guilt, after a man is already
absolved of the crime judicially, is contrary to the nature of a
presumption, which hath no place after judgment given. Yet this is set
down by a great lawyer for the common law of England. _If a man_, saith
he, _that is innocent, be accused of felony, and for fear flyeth for the
same; albeit he judicially acquitteth himself of the felony; yet if it
be found that he fled for the felony, he shall notwithstanding his
innocency, forfeit all his goods, chattels, debts, and duties. For as to
the forfeiture of them, the law will admit no proof against the
presumption in law, grounded upon his flight._ Here you see, _an
innocent man judicially acquitted, notwithstanding his innocency_, when
no written law forbad him to fly, after his acquittal, _upon a
presumption in law_, condemned to lose all the goods he hath. If the law
ground upon his flight a presumption of the fact, which was capital, the
sentence ought to have been capital: if the presumption were not of the
fact, for what then ought he to lose his goods? This therefore is no law
of England; nor is the condemnation grounded upon a presumption of law,
but upon the presumption of the judges. It is also against law, to say
that no proof shall be admitted against a presumption of law. For all
judges, sovereign and subordinate, if they refuse to hear proof, refuse
to do justice: for though the sentence be just, yet the judges that
condemn without hearing the proofs offered, are unjust judges; and their
presumption is but prejudice; which no man ought to bring with him to
the seat of justice, whatsoever precedent judgments, or examples he
shall pretend to follow. There be other things of this nature, wherein
men’s judgments have been perverted, by trusting to precedents: but this
is enough to show, that though the sentence of the judge, be a law to
the party pleading, yet it is no law to any judge, that shall succeed
him in that office.

In like manner, when question is of the meaning of written laws, he is
not the interpreter of them, that writeth a commentary upon them. For
commentaries are commonly more subject to cavil, than the text; and
therefore need other commentaries; and so there will be no end of such
interpretation. And therefore unless there be an interpreter authorized
by the sovereign, from which the subordinate judges are not to recede,
the interpreter can be no other than the ordinary judges, in the same
manner, as they are in cases of the unwritten law; and their sentences
are to be taken by them that plead, for laws in that particular case;
but not to bind other judges, in like cases to give like judgments. For
a judge may err in the interpretation even of written laws; but no error
of a subordinate judge, can change the law, which is the general
sentence of the sovereign.

[Sidenote: The difference between the letter and sentence of the law.]

In written laws, men use to make a difference between the letter, and
the sentence of the law: and when by the letter, is meant whatsoever can
be gathered from the bare words, it is well distinguished. For the
significations of almost all words, are either in themselves, or in the
metaphorical use of them, ambiguous; and may be drawn in argument, to
make many senses; but there is only one sense of the law. But if by the
letter, be meant the literal sense, then the letter, and the sentence or
intention of the law, is all one. For the literal sense is that, which
the legislator intended, should by the letter of the law be signified.
Now the intention of the legislator is always supposed to be equity: for
it were a great contumely for a judge to think otherwise of the
sovereign. He ought therefore, if the word of the law do not fully
authorize a reasonable sentence, to supply it with the law of nature; or
if the case be difficult, to respite judgment till he have received more
ample authority. For example, a written law ordaineth, that he which is
thrust out of his house by force, shall be restored by force: it happens
that a man by negligence leaves his house empty, and returning is kept
out by force, in which case there is no special law ordained. It is
evident that this case is contained in the same law: for else there is
no remedy for him at all; which is to be supposed against the intention
of the legislator. Again, the word of the law commandeth to judge
according to the evidence: a man is accused falsely of a fact, which the
judge himself saw done by another, and not by him that is accused. In
this case neither shall the letter of the law be followed to the
condemnation of the innocent, nor shall the judge give sentence against
the evidence of the witnesses; because the letter of the law is to the
contrary: but procure of the sovereign that another be made judge, and
himself witness. So that the incommodity that follows the bare words of
a written law, may lead him to the intention of the law, whereby to
interpret the same the better; though no incommodity can warrant a
sentence against the law. For every judge of right, and wrong, is not
judge of what is commodious, or incommodious to the commonwealth.

[Sidenote: The abilities required in a judge.]

The abilities required in a good interpreter of the law, that is to say,
in a good judge, are not the same with those of an advocate; namely the
study of the laws. For a judge, as he ought to take notice of the fact,
from none but the witnesses; so also he ought to take notice of the law
from nothing but the statutes, and constitutions of the sovereign,
alleged in the pleading, or declared to him by some that have authority
from the sovereign power to declare them; and need not take care
beforehand, what he shall judge; for it shall be given him what he shall
say concerning the fact, by witnesses; and what he shall say in point of
law, from those that shall in their pleadings show it, and by authority
interpret it upon the place. The Lords of parliament in England were
judges, and most difficult causes have been heard and determined by
them; yet few of them were much versed in the study of the laws, and
fewer had made profession of them: and though they consulted with
lawyers, that were appointed to be present there for that purpose; yet
they alone had the authority of giving sentence. In like manner, in the
ordinary trials of right, twelve men of the common people, are the
judges, and give sentence, not only of the fact, but of the right; and
pronounce simply for the complainant, or for the defendant; that is to
say, are judges, not only of the fact, but also of the right: and in a
question of crime, not only determine whether done, or not done; but
also whether it be _murder_, _homicide_, _felony_, _assault_, and the
like, which are determinations of law: but because they are not supposed
to know the law of themselves, there is one that hath authority to
inform them of it, in the particular case they are to judge of. But yet
if they judge not according to that he tells them, they are not subject
thereby to any penalty; unless it be made appear, that they did it
against their consciences, or had been corrupted by reward.

The things that make a good judge, or good interpreter of the laws, are,
first, _a right understanding_ of that principal law of nature called
_equity_; which depending not on the reading of other men’s writings,
but on the goodness of a man’s own natural reason, and meditation, is
presumed to be in those most, that have had most leisure, and had the
most inclination to meditate thereon. Secondly, _contempt of unnecessary
riches, and preferments_. Thirdly, _to be able in judgment to divest
himself of all fear, anger, hatred, love, and compassion_. Fourthly, and
lastly, _patience to hear; diligent attention in hearing; and memory to
retain, digest and apply what he hath heard_.

[Sidenote: Divisions of law.]

The difference and division of the laws, has been made in divers
manners, according to the different methods, of those men that have
written of them. For it is a thing that dependeth not on nature, but on
the scope of the writer; and is subservient to every man’s proper
method. In the Institutions of Justinian, we find seven sorts of civil
laws:

1. The _edicts_, _constitutions_, and _epistles of the prince_, that is,
of the emperor; because the whole power of the people was in him. Like
these, are the proclamations of the kings of England.

2. _The decrees of the whole people of Rome_, comprehending the senate,
when they were put to the question by the _senate_. These were laws, at
first, by the virtue of the sovereign power residing in the people; and
such of them as by the emperors were not abrogated, remained laws, by
the authority imperial. For all laws that bind, are understood to be
laws by his authority that has power to repeal them. Somewhat like to
these laws, are the acts of parliament in England.

3. _The decrees of the common people_, excluding the senate, when they
were put to the question by the _tribune_ of the people. For such of
them as were not abrogated by the emperors, remained laws by the
authority imperial. Like to these, were the orders of the House of
Commons in England.

4. _Senatus consulta_, the _orders of the senate_; because when the
people of Rome grew so numerous, as it was inconvenient to assemble
them; it was thought fit by the emperor, that men should consult the
senate, instead of the people; and these have some resemblance with the
acts of council.

5. _The edicts of prætors_, and in some cases of _ædiles_: such as are
the chief justices in the courts of England.

6. _Responsa prudentum_; which were the sentences, and opinion of those
lawyers, to whom the emperor gave authority to interpret the law, and to
give answer to such as in matter of law demanded their advice; which
answers, the judges in giving judgment were obliged by the constitutions
of the emperor to observe: and should be like the reports of cases
judged, if other judges be by the law of England bound to observe them.
For the judges of the common law of England, are not properly judges,
but _juris consulti_; of whom the judges, who are either the lords, or
twelve men of the country, are in point of law to ask advice.

7. Also, _unwritten customs_, which in their own nature are an imitation
of law, by the tacit consent of the emperor, in case they be not
contrary to the law of nature, are very laws.

[Sidenote: Another division of law.]

Another division of laws, is into _natural_ and _positive_. _Natural_
are those which have been laws from all eternity; and are called not
only _natural_, but also _moral_ laws; consisting in the moral virtues,
as justice, equity, and all habits of the mind that conduce to peace,
and charity; of which I have already spoken in the fourteenth and
fifteenth chapters.

_Positive_, are those which have not been from eternity; but have been
made laws by the will of those that have had the sovereign power over
others; and are either written, or made known to men, by some other
argument of the will of their legislator.

Again, of positive laws some are _human_, some _divine_; and of human
positive laws, some are _distributive_, some _penal_. _Distributive_ are
those that determine the rights of the subjects, declaring to every man
what it is, by which he acquireth and holdeth a propriety in lands, or
goods, and a right or liberty of action: and these speak to all the
subjects. _Penal_ are those, which declare, what penalty shall be
inflicted on those that violate the law; and speak to the ministers and
officers ordained for execution. For though every one ought to be
informed of the punishments ordained beforehand for their transgression;
nevertheless the command is not addressed to the delinquent, who cannot
be supposed will faithfully punish himself, but to public ministers
appointed to see the penalty executed. And these penal laws are for the
most part written together with the laws distributive; and are sometimes
called judgments. For all laws are general judgments, or sentences of
the legislator; as also every particular judgment, is a law to him,
whose case is judged.

[Sidenote: Divine positive law how made known to be law.]

_Divine positive laws_ (for natural laws being eternal, and universal,
are all divine), are those, which being the commandments of God, not
from all eternity, nor universally addressed to all men, but only to a
certain people, or to certain persons, are declared for such, by those
whom God hath authorized to declare them. But this authority of man to
declare what be these positive laws of God, how can it be known? God may
command a man by a supernatural way, to deliver laws to other men. But
because it is of the essence of law, that he who is to be obliged, be
assured of the authority of him that declareth it, which we cannot
naturally take notice to be from God, _how can a man without
supernatural revelation be assured of the revelation received by the
declarer?_ and _how can he be bound to obey them?_ For the first
question, how a man can be assured of the revelation of another, without
a revelation particularly to himself, it is evidently impossible. For
though a man may be induced to believe such revelation, from the
miracles they see him do, or from seeing the extraordinary sanctity of
his life, or from seeing the extraordinary wisdom, or extraordinary
felicity of his actions, all which are marks of God’s extraordinary
favour; yet they are not assured evidences of special revelation.
Miracles are marvellous works: but that which is marvellous to one, may
not be so to another. Sanctity may be feigned; and the visible
felicities of this world, are most often the work of God by natural, and
ordinary causes. And therefore no man can infallibly know by natural
reason, that another has had a supernatural revelation of God’s will;
but only a belief; every one, as the signs thereof shall appear greater
or lesser, a firmer or a weaker belief.

But for the second, how can he be bound to obey them; it is not so hard.
For if the law declared, be not against the law of nature, which is
undoubtedly God’s law, and he undertake to obey it, he is bound by his
own act; bound I say to obey it, but not bound to believe it: for men’s
belief, and interior cogitations, are not subject to the commands, but
only to the operation of God, ordinary, or extraordinary. Faith of
supernatural law, is not a fulfilling, but only an assenting to the
same; and not a duty that we exhibit to God, but a gift which God freely
giveth to whom he pleaseth; as also unbelief is not a breach of any of
his laws; but a rejection of them all, except the laws natural. But this
that I say, will be made yet clearer, by the examples and testimonies
concerning this point in holy Scripture. The covenant God made with
Abraham, in a supernatural manner, was thus, (_Gen._ xvii. 10) _This is
the covenant which thou shalt observe between me and thee and thy seed
after thee_. Abraham’s seed had not this revelation, nor were yet in
being; yet they are a party to the covenant, and bound to obey what
Abraham should declare to them for God’s law; which they could not be,
but in virtue of the obedience they owed to their parents; who, if they
be subject to no other earthly power, as here in the case of Abraham,
have sovereign power over their children and servants. Again, where God
saith to Abraham, _In thee shall all nations of the earth be blessed;
for I know thou wilt command thy children, and thy house after thee to
keep the way of the Lord, and to observe righteousness and judgment_, it
is manifest, the obedience of his family, who had no revelation,
depended on their former obligation to obey their sovereign. At Mount
Sinai Moses only went up to God; the people were forbidden to approach
on pain of death; yet they were bound to obey all that Moses declared to
them for God’s law. Upon what ground, but on this submission of their
own, _Speak thou to us, and we will hear thee; but let not God speak to
us, lest we die_? By which two places it sufficiently appeareth, that in
a commonwealth, a subject that has no certain and assured revelation
particularly to himself concerning the will of God, is to obey for such,
the command of the commonwealth: for if men were at liberty, to take for
God’s commandments, their own dreams and fancies, or the dreams and
fancies of private men; scarce two men would agree upon what is God’s
commandment; and yet in respect of them, every man would despise the
commandments of the commonwealth. I conclude therefore, that in all
things not contrary to the moral law, that is to say, to the law of
nature, all subjects are bound to obey that for divine law, which is
declared to be so, by the laws of the commonwealth. Which also is
evident to any man’s reason; for whatsoever is not against the law of
nature, may be made law in the name of them that have the sovereign
power; and there is no reason men should be the less obliged by it, when
it is propounded in the name of God. Besides, there is no place in the
world where men are permitted to pretend other commandments of God, than
are declared for such by the commonwealth. Christian states punish those
that revolt from the Christian religion, and all other states, those
that set up any religion by them forbidden. For in whatsoever is not
regulated by the commonwealth, it is equity, which is the law of nature,
and therefore an eternal law of God, that every man equally enjoy his
liberty.

[Sidenote: Another division of laws.]

There is also another distinction of laws, into _fundamental_ and _not
fundamental_; but I could never see in any author, what a fundamental
law signifieth. Nevertheless one may very reasonably distinguish laws in
that manner.

[Sidenote: A fundamental law, what.]

For a fundamental law in every commonwealth is that, which being taken
away, the commonwealth faileth, and is utterly dissolved; as a building
whose foundation is destroyed. And therefore a fundamental law is that,
by which subjects are bound to uphold whatsoever power is given to the
sovereign, whether a monarch, or a sovereign assembly, without which the
commonwealth cannot stand; such as is the power of war and peace, of
judicature, of election of officers, and of doing whatsoever he shall
think necessary for the public good. Not fundamental is that, the
abrogating whereof, draweth not with it the dissolution of the
commonwealth; such as are the laws concerning controversies between
subject and subject. Thus much of the division of laws.

[Sidenote: Difference between law and right.]

I find the words _lex civilis_, and _jus civile_, that is to say _law_
and _right civil_, promiscuously used for the same thing, even in the
most learned authors; which nevertheless ought not to be so. For _right_
is _liberty_, namely that liberty which the civil law leaves us: but
_civil law_ is an _obligation_, and takes from us the liberty which the
law of nature gave us. Nature gave a right to every man to secure
himself by his own strength, and to invade a suspected neighbour, by way
of prevention: but the civil law takes away that liberty, in all cases
where the protection of the law may be safely stayed for. Insomuch as
_lex_ and _jus_, are as different as _obligation_ and _liberty_.

[Sidenote: And between a law and a charter.]

Likewise _laws_ and _charters_ are taken promiscuously for the same
thing. Yet charters are donations of the sovereign; and not laws, but
exemptions from law. The phrase of a law is, _jubeo_, _injungo_, _I
command_ and _enjoin_: the phrase of a charter is, _dedi_, _concessi_,
_I have given_, _I have granted_: but what is given or granted, to a
man, is not forced upon him, by a law. A law may be made to bind all the
subjects of a commonwealth: a liberty, or charter is only to one man, or
some one part of the people. For to say all the people of a
commonwealth, have liberty in any case whatsoever, is to say, that in
such case, there hath been no law made; or else having been made, is now
abrogated.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXVII.

                 OF CRIMES, EXCUSES, AND EXTENUATIONS.


[Sidenote: Sin, what.]

A SIN, is not only a transgression of a law, but also any contempt of
the legislator. For such contempt, is a breach of all his laws at once.
And therefore may consist, not only in the _commission_ of a fact, or in
speaking of words by the laws forbidden, or in the _omission_ of what
the law commandeth, but also in the _intention_, or purpose to
transgress. For the purpose to break the law, is some degree of contempt
of him, to whom it belongeth to see it executed. To be delighted in the
imagination only, of being possessed of another man’s goods, servants,
or wife, without any intention to take them from him by force or fraud,
is no breach of the law, that saith, _Thou shalt not covet_: nor is the
pleasure a man may have in imagining or dreaming of the death of him,
from whose life he expecteth nothing but damage, and displeasure, a sin;
but the resolving to put some act in execution, that tendeth thereto.
For to be pleased in the fiction of that, which would please a man if it
were real, is a passion so adherent to the nature both of man, and every
other living creature, as to make it a sin, were to make sin of being a
man. The consideration of this, has made me think them too severe, both
to themselves, and others, that maintain, that the first motions of the
mind, though checked with the fear of God, be sins. But I confess it is
safer to err on that hand, than on the other.

[Sidenote: A crime, what.]

A CRIME, is a sin, consisting in the committing, by deed or word, of
that which the law forbiddeth, or the omission of what it hath
commanded. So that every crime is a sin; but not every sin a crime. To
intend to steal, or kill, is a sin, though it never appear in word, or
fact: for God that seeth the thoughts of man, can lay it to his charge:
but till it appear by something done, or said, by which the intention
may be argued by a human judge, it hath not the name of crime: which
distinction the Greeks observed, in the word ἁμάρτημα, and ἔγκλημα, or
ἀιτία; whereof the former, which is translated _sin_, signifieth any
swerving from the law whatsoever; but the two latter, which are
translated _crime_, signify that sin only, whereof one man may accuse
another. But of intentions, which never appear by any outward act, there
is no place for human accusation. In like manner the Latins by
_peccatum_, which is _sin_, signify all manner of deviation from the
law; but by _crimen_, which word they derive from _cerno_, which
signifies _to perceive_, they mean only such sins, as may be made appear
before a judge; and therefore are not mere intentions.

[Sidenote: Where no civil law is, there is no crime.]

From this relation of sin to the law, and of crime to the civil law, may
be inferred, first, that where law ceaseth, sin ceaseth. But because the
law of nature is eternal, violation of covenants, ingratitude,
arrogance, and all facts contrary to any moral virtue, can never cease
to be sin. Secondly, that the civil law ceasing, crimes cease: for there
being no other law remaining, but that of nature, there is no place for
accusation; every man being his own judge, and accused only by his own
conscience, and cleared by the uprightness of his own intention. When
therefore his intention is right, his fact is no sin: if otherwise, his
fact is sin; but not crime. Thirdly, that when the sovereign power
ceaseth, crime also ceaseth; for where there is no such power, there is
no protection to be had from the law; and therefore every one may
protect himself by his own power: for no man in the institution of
sovereign power can be supposed to give away the right of preserving his
own body; for the safety whereof all sovereignty was ordained. But this
is to be understood only of those, that have not themselves contributed
to the taking away of the power that protected them; for that was a
crime from the beginning.

[Sidenote: Ignorance of the law of nature excuseth no man.]

The source of every crime, is some defect of the understanding; or some
error in reasoning; or some sudden force of the passions. Defect in the
understanding, is _ignorance_; in reasoning, _erroneous opinion_. Again,
ignorance is of three sorts; of the _law_, and of the _sovereign_, and
of the _penalty_. Ignorance of the law of nature excuseth no man;
because every man that hath attained to the use of reason, is supposed
to know, he ought not to do to another, what he would not have done to
himself. Therefore into what place soever a man shall come, if he do
anything contrary to that law, it is a crime. If a man come from the
Indies hither, and persuade men here to receive a new religion, or teach
them anything that tendeth to disobedience of the laws of this country,
though he be never so well persuaded of the truth of what he teacheth,
he commits a crime, and may be justly punished for the same, not only
because his doctrine is false, but also because he does that which he
would not approve in another, namely, that coming from hence, he should
endeavour to alter the religion there. But ignorance of the civil law,
shall excuse a man in a strange country, till it be declared to him;
because, till then no civil law is binding.

[Sidenote: Ignorance of the civil law excuseth sometimes.]

In the like manner, if the civil law of a man’s own country, be not so
sufficiently declared, as he may know it if he will; nor the action
against the law of nature; the ignorance is a good excuse: in other
cases ignorance of the civil law, excuseth not.

[Sidenote: Ignorance of the sovereign excuseth not.]

Ignorance of the sovereign power, in the place of a man’s ordinary
residence, excuseth him not; because he ought to take notice of the
power, by which he hath been protected there.

[Sidenote: Ignorance of the penalty excuseth not.]

Ignorance of the penalty, where the law is declared, excuseth no man:
for in breaking the law, which without a fear of penalty to follow, were
not a law, but vain words, he undergoeth the penalty, though he know not
what it is; because, whosoever voluntarily doth any action, accepteth
all the known consequences of it; but punishment is a known consequence
of the violation of the laws, in every commonwealth; which punishment,
if it be determined already by the law, he is subject to that; if not,
then he is subject to arbitrary punishment. For it is reason, that he
which does injury, without other limitation than that of his own will,
should suffer punishment without other limitation, than that of his will
whose law is thereby violated.

[Sidenote: Punishments declared before the fact, excuse from greater
           punishments after it.]

But when a penalty, is either annexed to the crime in the law itself, or
hath been usually inflicted in the like cases; there the delinquent is
excused from a greater penalty. For the punishment foreknown, if not
great enough to deter men from the action, is an invitement to it:
because when men compare the benefit of their injustice, with the harm
of their punishment, by necessity of nature they chuse that which
appeareth best for themselves: and therefore when they are punished more
than the law had formerly determined, or more than others were punished
for the same crime; it is the law that tempted, and deceiveth them.

[Sidenote: Nothing can be made a crime by a law made after the fact.]

No law, made after a fact done, can make it a crime: because if the fact
be against the law of nature, the law was before the fact; and a
positive law cannot be taken notice of, before it be made; and therefore
cannot be obligatory. But when the law that forbiddeth a fact, is made
before the fact be done; yet he that doth the fact, is liable to the
penalty ordained after, in case no lesser penalty were made known
before, neither by writing, nor by example, for the reason immediately
before alleged.

[Sidenote: False principles of right & wrong causes of crime.]

From defect in reasoning, that is to say, from error, men are prone to
violate the laws, three ways. First, by presumption of false principles:
as when men, from having observed how in all places, and in all ages,
unjust actions have been authorized, by the force, and victories of
those who have committed them; and that potent men, breaking through the
cobweb laws of their country, the weaker sort, and those that have
failed in their enterprises, have been esteemed the only criminals; have
thereupon taken for principles, and grounds of their reasoning, _that
justice is but a vain word_: _that whatsoever a man can get by his own
industry, and hazard, is his own_: _that the practice of all nations
cannot be unjust_: _that examples of former times are good arguments of
doing the like again_; and many more of that kind: which being granted,
no act in itself can be a crime, but must be made so, not by the law,
but by the success of them that commit it; and the same fact be
virtuous, or vicious, as fortune pleaseth; so that what Marius makes a
crime, Sylla shall make meritorious, and Cæsar, the same laws standing,
turn again into a crime, to the perpetual disturbance of the peace of
the commonwealth.

[Sidenote: False teachers mis-interpreting the law of nature.]

Secondly, by false teachers, that either misinterpret the law of nature,
making it thereby repugnant to the law civil; or by teaching for laws,
such doctrines of their own, or traditions of former times, as are
inconsistent with the duty of a subject.

[Sidenote: And false inferences from true principles, by teachers.]

Thirdly, by erroneous inferences from true principles; which happens
commonly to men that are hasty, and precipitate in concluding, and
resolving what to do; such as are they, that have both a great opinion
of their own understanding, and believe that things of this nature
require not time and study, but only common experience, and a good
natural wit; whereof no man thinks himself unprovided: whereas the
knowledge, of right and wrong, which is no less difficult, there is no
man will pretend to, without great and long study. And of those defects
in reasoning, there is none that can excuse, though some of them may
extenuate, a crime in any man, that pretendeth to the administration of
his own private business; much less in them that undertake a public
charge; because they pretend to the reason, upon the want whereof they
would ground their excuse.

[Sidenote: By their passions.]

Of the passions that most frequently are the causes of crime, one, is
vain glory, or a foolish overrating of their own worth; as if difference
of worth, were an effect of their wit, or riches, or blood, or some
other natural quality, not depending on the will of those that have the
sovereign authority. From whence proceedeth a presumption that the
punishments ordained by the laws, and extended generally to all
subjects, ought not to be inflicted on them, with the same rigour they
are inflicted on poor, obscure, and simple men, comprehended under the
name of the _vulgar_.

[Sidenote: Presumption of riches,]

Therefore it happeneth commonly, that such as value themselves by the
greatness of their wealth, adventure on crimes, upon hope of escaping
punishment, by corrupting public justice, or obtaining pardon by money,
or other rewards.

[Sidenote: And friends.]

And that such as have multitude of potent kindred; and popular men, that
have gained reputation amongst the multitude, take courage to violate
the laws, from a hope of oppressing the power, to whom it belongeth to
put them in execution.

[Sidenote: Wisdom.]

And that such as have a great, and false opinion of their own wisdom,
take upon them to reprehend the actions, and call in question the
authority of them that govern, and so to unsettle the laws with their
public discourse, as that nothing shall be a crime, but what their own
designs require should be so. It happeneth also to the same men, to be
prone to all such crimes, as consist in craft, and in deceiving of their
neighbours; because they think their designs are too subtle to be
perceived. These I say are effects of a false presumption of their own
wisdom. For of them that are the first movers in the disturbance of
commonwealth, which can never happen without a civil war, very few are
left alive long enough, to see their new designs established: so that
the benefit of their crimes redoundeth to posterity, and such as would
least have wished it: which argues they were not so wise, as they
thought they were. And those that deceive upon hope of not being
observed, do commonly deceive themselves, the darkness in which they
believe they lie hidden, being nothing else but their own blindness; and
are no wiser than children, that think all hid, by hiding their own
eyes.

And generally all vain-glorious men, unless they be withal timorous, are
subject to anger; as being more prone than others to interpret for
contempt, the ordinary liberty of conversation: and there are few crimes
that may not be produced by anger.

[Sidenote: Hatred, lust, ambition, covetousness, causes of crime]

As for the passions, of hate, lust, ambition, and covetousness, what
crimes they are apt to produce, is so obvious to every man’s experience
and understanding, as there needeth nothing to be said of them, saving
that they are infirmities, so annexed to the nature, both of man, and
all other living creatures, as that their effects cannot be hindered,
but by extraordinary use of reason, or a constant severity in punishing
them. For in those things men hate, they find a continual, and
unavoidable molestation; whereby either a man’s patience must be
everlasting, or he must be eased by removing the power of that which
molesteth him. The former is difficult; the latter is many times
impossible, without some violation of the law. Ambition, and
covetousness are passions also that are perpetually incumbent, and
pressing; whereas reason is not perpetually present, to resist them: and
therefore whensoever the hope of impunity appears, their effects
proceed. And for lust, what it wants in the lasting, it hath in the
vehemence, which sufficeth to weigh down the apprehension of all easy,
or uncertain punishments.

[Sidenote: Fear sometimes cause of crime, as when the danger is neither
           present nor corporeal.]

Of all passions, that which inclineth men least to break the laws, is
fear. Nay, excepting some generous natures, it is the only thing, when
there is apparence of profit or pleasure by breaking the laws, that
makes men keep them. And yet in many cases a crime may be committed
through fear.

For not every fear justifies the action it produceth, but the fear only
of corporeal hurt, which we call _bodily fear_, and from which a man
cannot see how to be delivered, but by the action. A man is assaulted,
fears present death, from which he sees not how to escape, but by
wounding him that assaulteth him: if he wound him to death, this is no
crime; because no man is supposed at the making of a commonwealth, to
have abandoned the defence of his life, or limbs, where the law cannot
arrive time enough to his assistance. But to kill a man, because from
his actions, or his threatenings, I may argue he will kill me when he
can, seeing I have time, and means to demand protection, from the
sovereign power, is a crime. Again, a man receives words of disgrace or
some little injuries, for which they that made the laws, had assigned no
punishment, nor thought it worthy of a man that hath the use of reason,
to take notice of, and is afraid, unless he revenge it, he shall fall
into contempt, and consequently be obnoxious to the like injuries from
others; and to avoid this, breaks the law, and protects himself for the
future, by the terror of his private revenge. This is a crime: for the
hurt is not corporeal, but phantastical, and, though in this corner of
the world, made sensible by a custom not many years since begun, amongst
young and vain men, so light, as a gallant man, and one that is assured
of his own courage, cannot take notice of. Also a man may stand in fear
of spirits, either through his own superstition, or through too much
credit given to other men, that tell him of strange dreams and visions;
and thereby be made believe they will hurt him, for doing, or omitting
divers things, which nevertheless, to do, or omit, is contrary to the
laws; and that which is so done, or omitted, is not to be excused by
this fear; but is a crime. For, as I have shown before in the second
chapter, dreams be naturally but the fancies remaining in sleep, after
the impressions our senses had formerly received waking; and when men
are by any accident unassured they have slept, seem to be real visions;
and therefore he that presumes to break the law upon his own, or
another’s dream, or pretended vision, or upon other fancy of the power
of invisible spirits, than is permitted by the commonwealth, leaveth the
law of nature, which is a certain offence, and followeth the imagery of
his own, or another private man’s brain, which he can never know whether
it signifieth any thing or nothing, nor whether he that tells his dream,
say true, or lie; which if every private man should have leave to do, as
they must by the law of nature, if any one have it, there could no law
be made to hold, and so all commonwealth would be dissolved.

[Sidenote: Crimes not equal.]

From these different sources of crimes, it appears already, that all
crimes are not, as the Stoics of old time maintained, of the same allay.
There is place, not only for EXCUSE, by which that which seemed a crime,
is proved to be none at all; but also for EXTENUATION, by which the
crime, that seemed great, is made less. For though all crimes do equally
deserve the name of injustice, as all deviation from a straight line is
equally crookedness, which the Stoics rightly observed: yet it does not
follow that all crimes are equally unjust, no more than that all crooked
lines are equally crooked; which the Stoics not observing, held it as
great a crime, to kill a hen, against the law, as to kill one’s father.

[Sidenote: Total excuses.]

That which totally excuseth a fact, and takes away from it the nature of
a crime, can be none but that, which at the same time, taketh away the
obligation of the law. For the fact committed once against the law, if
he that committed it be obliged to the law, can be no other than a
crime.

The want of means to know the law, totally excuseth. For the law whereof
a man has no means to inform himself, is not obligatory. But the want of
diligence to inquire, shall not be considered as a want of means; nor
shall any man, that pretendeth to reason enough for the government of
his own affairs, be supposed to want means to know the laws of nature;
because they are known by the reason he pretends to: only children, and
madmen are excused from offences against the law natural.

Where a man is captive, or in the power of the enemy (and he is then in
the power of the enemy, when his person, or his means of living, is so),
if it be without his own fault, the obligation of the law ceaseth;
because he must obey the enemy, or die; and consequently such obedience
is no crime: for no man is obliged, when the protection of the law
faileth, not to protect himself, by the best means he can.

If a man, by the terror of present death, be compelled to do a fact
against the law, he is totally excused; because no law can oblige a man
to abandon his own preservation. And supposing such a law were
obligatory; yet a man would reason thus, _If I do it not, I die
presently; if I do it, I die afterwards; therefore by doing it, there is
time of life gained_; nature therefore compels him to the fact.

When a man is destitute of food, or other thing necessary for his life,
and cannot preserve himself any other way, but by some fact against the
law; as if in a great famine he take the food by force, or stealth,
which he cannot obtain for money nor charity; or in defence of his life,
snatch away another man’s sword; he is totally excused, for the reason
next before alleged.

[Sidenote: Excuses against the author.]

Again, facts done against the law by the authority of another, are by
that authority excused against the author; because no man ought to
accuse his own fact in another, that is but his instrument: but it is
not excused against a third person thereby injured; because in the
violation of the law, both the author and actor are criminals. From
hence it followeth that when that man, or assembly, that hath the
sovereign power, commandeth a man to do that which is contrary to a
former law, the doing of it is totally excused: for he ought not to
condemn it himself, because he is the author; and what cannot justly be
condemned by the sovereign, cannot justly be punished by any other.
Besides, when the sovereign commandeth anything to be done against his
own former law, the command, as to that particular fact, is an
abrogation of the law.

If that man, or assembly, that hath the sovereign power, disclaim any
right essential to the sovereignty, whereby there accrueth to the
subject, any liberty inconsistent with the sovereign power, that is to
say, with the very being of a commonwealth, if the subject shall refuse
to obey the command in anything contrary to the liberty granted, this is
nevertheless a sin, and contrary to the duty of the subject: for he
ought to take notice of what is inconsistent with the sovereignty,
because it was erected by his own consent and for his own defence; and
that such liberty as is inconsistent with it, was granted through
ignorance of the evil consequence thereof. But if he not only disobey,
but also resist a public minister in the execution of it, then it is a
crime; because he might have been righted, without any breach of the
peace, upon complaint.

The degrees of crime are taken on divers scales, and measured, first, by
the malignity of the source, or cause; secondly, by the contagion of the
example; thirdly, by the mischief of the effect; and fourthly, by the
concurrence of times, places, and persons.

[Sidenote: Presumption of power aggravateth.]

The same fact done against the law, if it proceed from presumption of
strength, riches, or friends to resist those that are to execute the
law, is a greater crime than if it proceed from hope of not being
discovered, or of escape by flight: for presumption of impunity by
force, is a root, from whence springeth, at all times, and upon all
temptations, a contempt of all laws; whereas in the latter case, the
apprehension of danger, that makes a man fly, renders him more obedient
for the future. A crime which we know to be so, is greater than the same
crime proceeding from a false persuasion that it is lawful; for he that
committeth it against his own conscience, presumeth on his force, or
other power, which encourages him to commit the same again: but he that
doth it by error, after the error is shewn him, is conformable to the
law.

[Sidenote: Evil teachers extenuate.]

He, whose error proceeds from the authority of a teacher, or an
interpreter of the law publicly authorized, is not so faulty as he whose
error proceedeth from a peremptory pursuit of his own principles and
reasoning: for what is taught by one that teacheth by public authority,
the commonwealth teacheth, and hath a resemblance of law, till the same
authority controlleth it; and in all crimes that contain not in them a
denial of the sovereign power, nor are against an evident law, excuseth
totally: whereas he that groundeth his actions on his private judgment,
ought, according to the rectitude, or error thereof, to stand or fall.

[Sidenote: Examples of impunity extenuate.]

The same fact, if it have been constantly punished in other men, is a
greater crime, than if there have been many precedent examples of
impunity. For those examples are so many hopes of impunity, given by the
sovereign himself: and because he which furnishes a man with such a hope
and presumption of mercy, as encourageth him to offend, hath his part in
the offence; he cannot reasonably charge the offender with the whole.

[Sidenote: Premeditation aggravateth.]

A crime arising from a sudden passion, is not so great, as when the same
ariseth from long meditation: for in the former case there is a place
for extenuation, in the common infirmity of human nature: but he that
doth it with premeditation, has used circumspection, and cast his eye on
the law, on the punishment, and on the consequence thereof to human
society; all which, in committing the crime, he hath contemned and
postposed to his own appetite. But there is no suddenness of passion
sufficient for a total excuse: for all the time between the first
knowing of the law, and the commission of the fact, shall be taken for a
time of deliberation; because he ought by meditation of the law, to
rectify the irregularity of his passions.

Where the law is publicly, and with assiduity, before all the people
read and interpreted, a fact done against it, is a greater crime, than
where men are left without such instruction, to enquire of it with
difficulty, uncertainty, and interruption of their callings, and be
informed by private men: for in this case, part of the fault is
discharged upon common infirmity; but, in the former, there is apparent
negligence, which is not without some contempt of the sovereign power.

[Sidenote: Tacit approbation of the sovereign extenuates.]

Those facts which the law expressly condemneth, but the law-maker by
other manifest signs of his will tacitly approveth, are less crimes,
than the same facts, condemned both by the law and law-maker. For seeing
the will of the law-maker is a law, there appear in this case two
contradictory laws; which would totally excuse, if men were bound to
take notice of the sovereign’s approbation, by other arguments than are
expressed by his command. But because there are punishments consequent,
not only to the transgression of his law, but also to the observing of
it, he is in part a cause of the transgression, and therefore cannot
reasonably impute the whole crime to the delinquent. For example, the
law condemneth duels; the punishment is made capital: on the contrary
part, he that refuseth duel, is subject to contempt and scorn, without
remedy; and sometimes by the sovereign himself thought unworthy to have
any charge, or preferment in war. If thereupon he accept duel,
considering all men lawfully endeavour to obtain the good opinion of
them that have the sovereign power, he ought not in reason to be
rigorously punished; seeing part of the fault may be discharged on the
punisher: which I say, not as wishing liberty of private revenges, or
any other kind of disobedience; but a care in governors, not to
countenance anything obliquely, which directly they forbid. The examples
of princes, to those that see them, are, and ever have been, more potent
to govern their actions, than the laws themselves. And though it be our
duty to do, not what they do, but what they say; yet will that duty
never be performed, till it please God to give men an extraordinary, and
supernatural grace to follow that precept.

[Sidenote: Comparison of crimes from their effects.]

Again, if we compare crimes by the mischief of their effects; first, the
same fact, when it redounds to the damage of many, is greater, than when
it redounds to the hurt of few. And therefore, when a fact hurteth, not
only in the present, but also, by example, in the future, it is a
greater crime, than if it hurt only in the present: for the former, is a
fertile crime, and multiplies to the hurt of many; the latter is barren.
To maintain doctrines contrary to the religion established in the
commonwealth, is a greater fault, in an authorized preacher, than in a
private person: so also is it, to live profanely, incontinently, or do
any irreligious act whatsoever. Likewise in a professor of the law, to
maintain any point, or do any act, that tendeth to the weakening of the
sovereign power, is a greater crime, than in another man: also in a man
that hath such reputation for wisdom, as that his counsels are followed,
or his actions imitated by many, his fact against the law, is a greater
crime, than the same fact in another: for such men not only commit
crime, but teach it for law to all other men. And generally all crimes
are the greater, by the scandal they give; that is to say, by becoming
stumbling-blocks to the weak, that look not so much upon the way they go
in, as upon the light that other man carry before them.

[Sidenote: Læsa Majestas.]

Also facts of hostility against the present state of the commonwealth,
are greater crimes, than the same acts done to private men: for the
damage extends itself to all: such are the betraying of the strengths,
or revealing of the secrets of the commonwealth to an enemy; also all
attempts upon the representative of the commonwealth, be it a monarch,
or an assembly; and all endeavours by word, or deed, to diminish the
authority of the same, either in the present time, or in succession:
which crimes the Latins understand by _crimina læsæ majestatis_, and
consist in design, or act, contrary to a fundamental law.

[Sidenote: Bribery and false testimony.]

Likewise those crimes, which render judgments of no effect, are greater
crimes, than injuries done to one, or a few persons; as to receive money
to give false judgment, or testimony, is a greater crime, than otherwise
to deceive a man of the like, or a greater sum; because not only he has
wrong, that falls by such judgments; but all judgments are rendered
useless, and occasion ministered to force, and private revenges.

[Sidenote: Depeculation.]

Also robbery, and depeculation of the public treasure, or revenues, is a
greater crime, than the robbing, or defrauding of a private man; because
to rob the public, is to rob many at once.

[Sidenote: Counterfeiting authority.]

Also the counterfeit usurpation of public ministry, the counterfeiting
of public seals or public coin, than counterfeiting of a private man’s
person, or his seal; because the fraud thereof, extendeth to the damage
of many.

[Sidenote: Crimes against private men compared.]

Of facts against the law, done to private men, the greater crime, is
that, where the damage in the common opinion of men, is most sensible.
And therefore

To kill against the law, is a greater crime, than any other injury, life
preserved.

And to kill with torment, greater, than simply to kill.

And mutilation of a limb, greater, than the spoiling a man of his goods.

And the spoiling a man of his goods, by terror of death, or wounds, than
by clandestine surreption.

And by clandestine surreption, than by consent fraudulently obtained.

And the violation of chastity by force, greater, than by flattery.

And of a woman married, than of a woman not married.

For all these things are commonly so valued: though some men are more,
and some less sensible of the same offence. But the law regardeth not
the particular, but the general inclination of mankind.

And therefore the offence men take, from contumely, in words, or
gesture, when they produce no other harm, than the present grief of him
that is reproached, hath been neglected in the laws of the Greeks,
Romans, and other both ancient and modern commonwealths; supposing the
true cause of such grief to consist, not in the contumely, which takes
no hold upon men conscious of their own virtue, but in the pusillanimity
of him that is offended by it.

Also a crime against a private man, is much aggravated by the person,
time, and place. For to kill one’s parent, is a greater crime, than to
kill another: for the parent ought to have the honour of a sovereign,
though he surrendered his power to the civil law; because he had it
originally by nature. And to rob a poor man, is a greater crime, than to
rob a rich man; because it is to the poor a more sensible damage.

And a crime committed in the time or place appointed for devotion, is
greater, than if committed at another time or place: for it proceeds
from a greater contempt of the law.

Many other cases of aggravation, and extenuation might be added: but by
these I have set down, it is obvious to every man, to take the altitude
of any other crime proposed.

[Sidenote: Public crimes what.]

Lastly, because in almost all crimes there is an injury done, not only
to some private men, but also to the commonwealth; the same crime, when
the accusation is in the name of the commonwealth, is called public
crime: and when in the name of a private man, a private crime; and the
pleas according thereunto called public, _judicia publica_, Pleas of the
Crown; or Private Pleas. As in an accusation of murder, if the accuser
be a private man, the plea is a Private Plea; if the accuser be the
sovereign, the plea is a Public Plea.


                                -------


                            CHAPTER XXVIII.

                      OF PUNISHMENTS AND REWARDS.


[Sidenote: The definition of punishment.]

A PUNISHMENT, _is an evil inflicted by public authority, on him that
hath done, or omitted that which is judged by the same authority to be a
transgression of the law; to the end that the will of men may thereby
the better be disposed to obedience_.

[Sidenote: Right to punish whence derived:]

Before I infer any thing from this definition, there is a question to be
answered, of much importance; which is, by what door the right or
authority of punishing in any case, came in. For by that which has been
said before, no man is supposed bound by covenant, not to resist
violence; and consequently it cannot be intended, that he gave any right
to another to lay violent hands upon his person. In the making of a
commonwealth, every man giveth away the right of defending another; but
not of defending himself. Also he obligeth himself, to assist him that
hath the sovereignty, in the punishing of another; but of himself not.
But to covenant to assist the sovereign, in doing hurt to another,
unless he that so covenanteth have a right to do it himself, is not to
give him a right to punish. It is manifest therefore that the right
which the commonwealth, that is, he, or they that represent it, hath to
punish, is not grounded on any concession, or gift of the subjects. But
I have also showed formerly, that before the institution of
commonwealth, every man had a right to every thing, and to do whatsoever
he thought necessary to his own preservation; subduing, hurting, or
killing any man in order thereunto. And this is the foundation of that
right of punishing, which is exercised in every commonwealth. For the
subjects did not give the sovereign that right; but only in laying down
theirs, strengthened him to use his own, as he should think fit, for the
preservation of them all: so that it was not given, but left to him, and
to him only; and (excepting the limits set him by natural law) as
entire, as in the condition of mere nature, and of war of every one
against his neighbour.

[Sidenote: Private injuries & revenges no punishments:]

From the definition of punishment, I infer, first, that neither private
revenges, nor injuries of private men, can properly be styled
punishment; because they proceed not from public authority.

[Sidenote: Nor denial of preferment:]

Secondly, that to be neglected, and unpreferred by the public favour, is
not a punishment; because no new evil is thereby on any man inflicted;
he is only left in the estate he was in before.

[Sidenote: Nor pain inflicted without public hearing;]

Thirdly, that the evil inflicted by public authority, without precedent
public condemnation, is not to be styled by the name of punishment; but
of an hostile act; because the fact for which a man is punished, ought
first to be judged by public authority, to be a transgression of the
law.

[Sidenote: Nor pain inflicted by usurped power;]

Fourthly, that the evil inflicted by usurped power, and judges without
authority from the sovereign, is not punishment; but an act of
hostility; because the acts of power usurped, have not for author, the
person condemned; and therefore are not acts of public authority.

[Sidenote: Nor pain inflicted without respect to the future good.]

Fifthly, that all evil which is inflicted without intention, or
possibility of disposing the delinquent, or, by his example, other men,
to obey the laws, is not punishment; but an act of hostility: because
without such an end, no hurt done is contained under that name.

[Sidenote: Natural evil consequences no punishments.]

Sixthly, whereas to certain actions, there be annexed by nature, divers
hurtful consequences; as when a man in assaulting another, is himself
slain, or wounded; or when he falleth into sickness by the doing of some
unlawful act; such hurt, though in respect of God, who is the author of
nature, it may be said to be inflicted, and therefore a punishment
divine; yet it is not contained in the name of punishment in respect of
men, because it is not inflicted by the authority of man.

[Sidenote: Hurt inflicted, if less than the benefit of transgressing, is
           not punishment.]

Seventhly, if the harm inflicted be less than the benefit, or
contentment that naturally followeth the crime committed, that harm is
not within the definition; and is rather the price, or redemption, than
the punishment of a crime: because it is of the nature of punishment, to
have for end, the disposing of men to obey the law; which end, if it be
less than the benefit of the transgression, it attaineth not, but
worketh a contrary effect.

[Sidenote: Where the punishment is annexed to the law, a greater hurt is
           not punishment, but hostility.]

Eighthly, if a punishment be determined and prescribed in the law
itself, and after the crime committed, there be a greater punishment
inflicted, the excess is not punishment, but an act of hostility. For
seeing the aim of punishment is not a revenge, but terror; and the
terror of a great punishment unknown, is taken away by the declaration
of a less, the unexpected addition is no part of the punishment. But
where there is no punishment at all determined by the law, there
whatsoever is inflicted, hath the nature of punishment. For he that goes
about the violation of a law, wherein no penalty is determined,
expecteth an indeterminate, that is to say, an arbitrary punishment.

[Sidenote: Hurt inflicted for a fact done before the law, no
           punishment.]

Ninthly, harm inflicted for a fact done before there was a law that
forbade it, is not punishment, but an act of hostility: for before the
law, there is no transgression of the law: but punishment supposeth a
fact judged, to have been a transgression of the law; therefore harm
inflicted before the law made, is not punishment, but an act of
hostility.

[Sidenote: The representative of the commonwealth unpunishable.]

Tenthly, hurt inflicted on the representative of the commonwealth, is
not punishment, but an act of hostility: because it is of the nature of
punishment, to be inflicted by public authority, which is the authority
only of the representative itself.

[Sidenote: Hurt to revolted subjects is done by right of war, not by way
           of punishment.]

Lastly, harm inflicted upon one that is a declared enemy, falls not
under the name of punishment: because seeing they were either never
subject to the law, and therefore cannot transgress it; or having been
subject to it, and professing to be no longer so, by consequence deny
they can transgress it, all the harms that can be done them, must be
taken as acts of hostility. But in declared hostility, all infliction of
evil is lawful. From whence it followeth, that if a subject shall by
fact, or word, wittingly, and deliberately deny the authority of the
representative of the commonwealth (whatsoever penalty hath been
formerly ordained for treason) he may lawfully be made to suffer
whatsoever the representative will. For in denying subjection, he denies
such punishment as by the law hath been ordained; and therefore suffers
as an enemy of the commonwealth; that is, according to the will of the
representative. For the punishments set down in the law, are to
subjects, not to enemies; such as are they, that having been by their
own acts subjects, deliberately revolting, deny the sovereign power.

The first, and most general distribution of punishments, is into
_divine_, and _human_. Of the former I shall have occasion to speak, in
a more convenient place hereafter.

_Human_, are those punishments that be inflicted by the commandment of
man; and are either _corporal_, or _pecuniary_, or _ignominy_, or
_imprisonment_, or _exile_, or mixed of these.

[Sidenote: Punishments corporal.]

_Corporal punishment_ is that, which is inflicted on the body directly,
and according to the intention of him that inflicteth it: such as are
stripes, or wounds, or deprivation of such pleasures of the body, as
were before lawfully enjoyed.

[Sidenote: Capital.]

And of these, some be _capital_, some _less_ than _capital_. Capital, is
the infliction of death; and that either simply, or with torment. Less
than capital, are stripes, wounds, chains, and any other corporal pain,
not in its own nature mortal. For if upon the infliction of a punishment
death follow not in the intention of the inflictor, the punishment is
not to be esteemed capital, though the harm prove mortal by an accident
not to be foreseen; in which case death is not inflicted, but hastened.

_Pecuniary punishment_, is that which consisteth not only in the
deprivation of a sum of money, but also of lands, or any other goods
which are usually bought and sold for money. And in case the law, that
ordaineth such a punishment, be made with design to gather money, from
such as shall transgress the same, it is not properly a punishment, but
the price of privilege and exemption from the law, which doth not
absolutely forbid the fact, but only to those that are not able to pay
the money: except where the law is natural, or part of religion; for in
that case it is not an exemption from the law, but a transgression of
it. As where a law exacteth a pecuniary mulct, of them that take the
name of God in vain, the payment of the mulct, is not the price of a
dispensation to swear, but the punishment of the transgression of a law
indispensable. In like manner if the law impose a sum of money to be
paid, to him that has been injured; this is but a satisfaction for the
hurt done him; and extinguisheth the accusation of the party injured,
not the crime of the offender.

[Sidenote: Ignominy.]

_Ignominy_, is the infliction of such evil, as is made dishonourable; or
the deprivation of such good, as is made honourable by the commonwealth.
For there be some things honourable by nature; as the effects of
courage, magnanimity, strength, wisdom, and other abilities of body and
mind: others made honourable by the commonwealth; as badges, titles,
offices, or any other singular mark of the sovereign’s favour. The
former, though they may fail by nature, or accident, cannot be taken
away by a law; and therefore the loss of them is not punishment. But the
latter, may be taken away by the public authority that made them
honourable, and are properly punishments: such are degrading men
condemned, of their badges, titles, and offices; or declaring them
incapable of the like in time to come.

[Sidenote: Imprisonment.]

_Imprisonment_, is when a man is by public authority deprived of
liberty; and may happen from two divers ends; whereof one is the safe
custody of a man accused; the other is the inflicting of pain on a man
condemned. The former is not punishment; because no man is supposed to
be punished, before he be judicially heard, and declared guilty. And
therefore whatsoever hurt a man is made to suffer by bonds, or
restraint, before his cause be heard, over and above that which is
necessary to assure his custody, is against the law of nature. But the
latter is punishment, because evil, and inflicted by public authority,
for somewhat that has by the same authority been judged a transgression
of the law. Under this word imprisonment, I comprehend all restraint of
motion, caused by an external obstacle, be it a house, which is called
by the general name of a prison; or an island, as when men are said to
be confined to it; or a place where men are set to work, as in old time
men have been condemned to quarries, and in these times to galleys; or
be it a chain, or any other such impediment.

[Sidenote: Exile.]

_Exile_ (banishment) is when a man is for a crime, condemned to depart
out of the dominion of the commonwealth, or out of a certain part
thereof: and during a prefixed time, or for ever, not to return into it:
and seemeth not in its own nature, without other circumstances, to be a
punishment; but rather an escape, or a public commandment to avoid
punishment by flight. And Cicero says, there was never any such
punishment ordained in the city of Rome; but calls it a refuge of men in
danger. For if a man banished, be nevertheless permitted to enjoy his
goods, and the revenue of his lands, the mere change of air is no
punishment, nor does it tend to that benefit of the commonwealth, for
which all punishments are ordained, that is to say, to the forming of
men’s wills to the observation of the law; but many times to the damage
of the commonwealth. For a banished man, is a lawful enemy of the
commonwealth that banished him; as being no more a member of the same.
But if he be withal deprived of his lands, or goods, then the punishment
lieth not in the exile, but is to be reckoned amongst punishments
pecuniary.

[Sidenote: The punishment of innocent subjects is contrary to the law of
           nature.]

All punishments of innocent subjects, be they great or little, are
against the law of nature; for punishment is only for transgression of
the law, and therefore there can be no punishment of the innocent. It is
therefore a violation, first, of that law of nature, which forbiddeth
all men, in their revenges, to look at anything but some future good:
for there can arrive no good to the commonwealth, by punishing the
innocent. Secondly, of that, which forbiddeth ingratitude: for seeing
all sovereign power, is originally given by the consent of every one of
the subjects, to the end they should as long as they are obedient, be
protected thereby; the punishment of the innocent, is a rendering of
evil for good. And thirdly, of the law that commandeth equity; that is
to say, an equal distribution of justice; which in punishing the
innocent is not observed.

[Sidenote: But the harm done to innocents in war not so.]

But the infliction of what evil soever, on an innocent man, that is not
a subject, if it be for the benefit of the commonwealth, and without
violation of any former covenant, is no breach of the law of nature. For
all men that are not subjects, are either enemies, or else they have
ceased from being so by some precedent covenants. But against enemies,
whom the commonwealth judgeth capable to do them hurt, it is lawful by
the original right of nature to make war; wherein the sword judgeth not,
nor doth the victor make distinction of nocent, and innocent, as to the
time past nor has other respect of mercy, than as it conduceth to the
good of his own people. [Sidenote: Nor that which is done to declared
rebels.] And upon this ground it is, that also in subjects, who
deliberately deny the authority of the commonwealth established, the
vengeance is lawfully extended, not only to the fathers, but also to the
third and fourth generation not yet in being, and consequently innocent
of the fact, for which they are afflicted: because the nature of this
offence, consisteth in the renouncing of subjection; which is a relapse
into the condition of war, commonly called rebellion; and they that so
offend, suffer not as subjects, but as enemies. For _rebellion_, is but
war renewed.

[Sidenote: Reward is either salary or grace.]

REWARD, is either of _gift_, or by _contract_. When by contract, it is
called _salary_, and _wages_; which is benefit due for service
performed, or promised. When of gift, it is benefit proceeding from the
_grace_ of them that bestow it, to encourage, or enable men to do them
service. And therefore when the sovereign of a commonwealth appointeth a
salary to any public office, he that receiveth it, is bound in justice
to perform his office; otherwise, he is bound only in honour, to
acknowledgment, and an endeavour of requital. For though men have no
lawful remedy, when they be commanded to quit their private business, to
serve the public, without reward or salary; yet they are not bound
thereto, by the law of nature, nor by the institution of the
commonwealth, unless the service cannot otherwise be done; because it is
supposed the sovereign may make use of all their means, insomuch as the
most common soldier, may demand the wages of his warfare, as a debt.

[Sidenote: Benefits bestowed for fear are not rewards.]

The benefit which a sovereign bestoweth on a subject, for fear of some
power and ability he hath to do hurt to the commonwealth, are not
properly rewards; for they are not salaries; because there is in this
case no contract supposed, every man being obliged already not to do the
commonwealth disservice: nor are they graces; because they be extorted
by fear, which ought not to be incident to the sovereign power: but are
rather sacrifices, which the sovereign, considered in his natural
person, and not in the person of the commonwealth, makes, for the
appeasing the discontent of him he thinks more potent than himself; and
encourage not to obedience, but on the contrary, to the continuance, and
increasing of further extortion.

[Sidenote: Salaries certain and casual.]

And whereas some salaries are certain, and proceed from the public
treasure; and others uncertain, and casual, proceeding from the
execution of the office for which the salary is ordained; the latter is
in some cases hurtful to the commonwealth; as in the case of judicature.
For where the benefit of the judges, and ministers of a court of justice
ariseth from the multitude of causes that are brought to their
cognizance, there must needs follow two inconveniences: one, is the
nourishing of suits; for the more suits, the greater benefit: and
another that depends on that, which is contention about jurisdiction;
each court drawing to itself, as many causes as it can. But in offices
of execution there are not those inconveniences; because their
employment cannot be increased by any endeavour of their own. And thus
much shall suffice for the nature of punishment and reward; which are,
as it were, the nerves and tendons, that move the limbs and joints of a
commonwealth.

Hitherto I have set forth the nature of man, whose pride and other
passions have compelled him to submit himself to government: together
with the great power of his governor, whom I compared to _Leviathan_,
taking that comparison out of the two last verses of the
one-and-fortieth of _Job_; where God having set forth the great power of
_Leviathan_, calleth him king of the proud. _There is nothing_, saith
he, _on earth, to be compared with him. He is made so as not to be
afraid. He seeth every high thing below him; and is king of all the
children of pride._ But because he is mortal, and subject to decay, as
all other earthly creatures are; and because there is that in heaven,
though not on earth, that he should stand in fear of, and whose laws he
ought to obey; I shall in the next following chapters speak of his
diseases, and the causes of his mortality; and of what laws of nature he
is bound to obey.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXIX.

                OF THOSE THINGS THAT WEAKEN, OR TEND TO
                   THE DISSOLUTION OF A COMMONWEALTH.


[Sidenote: Dissolution of commonwealths proceedeth from their imperfect
           institution.]

Though nothing can be immortal, which mortals make; yet, if men had the
use of reason they pretend to, their commonwealths might be secured, at
least from perishing by internal diseases. For by the nature of their
institution, they are designed to live, as long as mankind, or as the
laws of nature, or as justice itself, which gives them life. Therefore
when they come to be dissolved, not by external violence, but intestine
disorder, the fault is not in men, as they are the _matter_; but as they
are the _makers_, and orderers of them. For men, as they become at last
weary of irregular jostling, and hewing one another, and desire with all
their hearts, to conform themselves into one firm and lasting edifice:
so for want, both of the art of making fit laws, to square their actions
by, and also of humility, and patience, to suffer the rude and
cumbersome points of their present greatness to be taken off, they
cannot without the help of a very able architect, be compiled into any
other than a crazy building, such as hardly lasting out their own time,
must assuredly fall upon the heads of their posterity.

Amongst the _infirmities_ therefore of a commonwealth, I will reckon in
the first place, those that arise from an imperfect institution, and
resemble the diseases of a natural body, which proceed from a defectuous
procreation.

[Sidenote: Want of absolute power.]

Of which, this is one, _that a man to obtain a kingdom, is sometimes
content with less power, than to the peace, and defence of the
commonwealth is necessarily required_. From whence it cometh to pass,
that when the exercise of the power laid by, is for the public safety to
be resumed, it hath the resemblance of an unjust act; which disposeth
great numbers of men, when occasion is presented, to rebel; in the same
manner as the bodies of children, gotten by diseased parents, are
subject either to untimely death, or to purge the ill quality, derived
from their vicious conception, by breaking out into biles and scabs. And
when kings deny themselves some such necessary power, it is not always,
though sometimes, out of ignorance of what is necessary to the office
they undertake; but many times out of a hope to recover the same again
at their pleasure. Wherein they reason not well; because such as will
hold them to their promises, shall be maintained against them by foreign
commonwealths; who in order to the good of their own subjects let slip
few occasions to _weaken_ the estate of their neighbours. So was Thomas
Becket, archbishop of Canterbury, supported against Henry the Second, by
the Pope; the subjection of ecclesiastics to the commonwealth, having
been dispensed with by William the Conqueror at his reception, when he
took an oath, not to infringe the liberty of the church. And so were the
barons, whose power was by William Rufus, to have their help in
transferring the succession from his elder brother to himself, increased
to a degree inconsistent with the sovereign power, maintained in their
rebellion against king John, by the French.

Nor does this happen in monarchy only. For whereas the style of the
ancient Roman commonwealth, was, _the senate and people of Rome_;
neither senate, nor people pretended to the whole power; which first
caused the seditions, of Tiberius Gracchus, Caius Gracchus, Lucius
Saturninus, and others; and afterwards the wars between the senate and
the people, under Marius and Sylla; and again under Pompey and Cæsar, to
the extinction of their democracy, and the setting up of monarchy.

The people of Athens bound themselves but from one only action; which
was, that no man on pain of death should propound the renewing of the
war for the island of Salamis; and yet thereby, if Solon had not caused
to be given out he was mad, and afterwards in gesture and habit of a
madman, and in verse, propounded it to the people that flocked about
him, they had had an enemy perpetually in readiness, even at the gates
of their city; such damage, or shifts, are all commonwealths forced to,
that have their power never so little limited.

[Sidenote: Private judgment of good and evil.]

In the second place, I observe the _diseases_ of a commonwealth, that
proceed from the poison of seditious doctrines, whereof one is, _That
every private man is judge of good and evil actions_. This is true in
the condition of mere nature, where there are no civil laws; and also
under civil government, in such cases as are not determined by the law.
But otherwise, it is manifest, that the measure of good and evil
actions, is the civil law; and the judge the legislator, who is always
representative of the commonwealth. From this false doctrine, men are
disposed to debate with themselves, and dispute the commands of the
commonwealth; and afterwards to obey, or disobey them, as in their
private judgments they shall think fit; whereby the commonwealth is
distracted and _weakened_.

[Sidenote: Erroneous conscience.]

Another doctrine repugnant to civil society, is, that _whatsoever a man
does against his conscience, is sin_; and it dependeth on the
presumption of making himself judge of good and evil. For a man’s
conscience, and his judgment is the same thing, and as the judgment, so
also the conscience may be erroneous. Therefore, though he that is
subject to no civil law, sinneth in all he does against his conscience,
because he has no other rule to follow but his own reason; yet it is not
so with him that lives in a commonwealth; because the law is the public
conscience, by which he hath already undertaken to be guided. Otherwise
in such diversity, as there is of private consciences, which are but
private opinions, the commonwealth must needs be distracted, and no man
dare to obey the sovereign power, further than it shall seem good in his
own eyes.

[Sidenote: Pretence of inspiration.]

It hath been also commonly taught, _that faith and sanctity, are not to
be attained by study and reason, but by supernatural inspiration, or
infusion_. Which granted, I see not why any man should render a reason
of his faith; or why every Christian should not be also a prophet; or
why any man should take the law of his country, rather than his own
inspiration, for the rule of his action. And thus we fall again in the
fault of taking upon us to judge of good and evil; or to make judges of
it, such private men as pretend to be supernaturally inspired, to the
dissolution of all civil government. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by those accidents, which guide us into the presence of them that speak
to us; which accidents are all contrived by God Almighty; and yet are
not supernatural, but only, for the great number of them that concur to
every effect, unobservable. Faith and sanctity, are indeed not very
frequent; but yet they are not miracles, but brought to pass by
education, discipline, correction, and other natural ways, by which God
worketh them in his elect, at such times as he thinketh fit. And these
three opinions, pernicious to peace and government, have in this part of
the world, proceeded chiefly from the tongues, and pens of unlearned
divines, who joining the words of Holy Scripture together, otherwise
than is agreeable to reason, do what they can, to make men think, that
sanctity and natural reason, cannot stand together.

[Sidenote: Subjecting the sovereign power to civil laws.]

A fourth opinion, repugnant to the nature of a commonwealth, is this,
_that he that hath the sovereign power is subject to the civil laws_. It
is true, that sovereigns are all subject to the laws of nature; because
such laws be divine, and cannot by any man, or commonwealth be
abrogated. But to those laws which the sovereign himself, that is, which
the commonwealth maketh, he is not subject. For to be subject to laws,
is to be subject to the commonwealth, that is to the sovereign
representative, that is to himself; which is not subjection, but freedom
from the laws. Which error, because it setteth the laws above the
sovereign, setteth also a judge above him, and a power to punish him;
which is to make a new sovereign; and again for the same reason a third,
to punish the second; and so continually without end, to the confusion,
and dissolution of the commonwealth.

[Sidenote: Attributing of absolute propriety to subjects.]

A fifth doctrine, that tendeth to the dissolution of a commonwealth, is,
_that every private man has an absolute propriety in his goods; such, as
excludeth the right of the sovereign_. Every man has indeed a propriety
that excludes the right of every other subject: and he has it only from
the sovereign power; without the protection whereof, every other man
should have equal right to the same. But if the right of the sovereign
also be excluded, he cannot perform the office they have put him into;
which is, to defend them both from foreign enemies, and from the
injuries of one another; and consequently there is no longer a
commonwealth.

And if the propriety of subjects, exclude not the right of the sovereign
representative to their goods; much less to their offices of judicature,
or execution, in which they represent the sovereign himself.

[Sidenote: Dividing of the sovereign power.]

There is a sixth doctrine, plainly, and directly against the essence of
a commonwealth; and it is this, _that the sovereign power may be
divided_. For what is it to divide the power of a commonwealth, but to
dissolve it; for powers divided mutually destroy each other. And for
these doctrines, men are chiefly beholding to some of those, that making
profession of the laws, endeavour to make them depend upon their own
learning, and not upon the legislative power.

[Sidenote: Imitation of neighbour nations.]

And as false doctrine, so also oftentimes the example of different
government in a neighbouring nation, disposeth men to alteration of the
form already settled. So the people of the Jews were stirred up to
reject God, and to call upon the prophet Samuel, for a king after the
manner of the nations: so also the lesser cities of Greece, were
continually disturbed, with seditions of the aristocratical, and
democratical factions; one part of almost every commonwealth, desiring
to imitate the Lacedemonians; the other, the Athenians. And I doubt not,
but many men have been contented to see the late troubles in England,
out of an imitation of the Low Countries; supposing there needed no more
to grow rich, than to change, as they had done, the form of their
government. For the constitution of man’s nature, is of itself subject
to desire novelty. When therefore they are provoked to the same, by the
neighbourhood also of those that have been enriched by it, it is almost
impossible for them, not to be content with those that solicit them to
change; and love the first beginnings, though they be grieved with the
continuance of disorder; like hot bloods, that having gotten the itch,
tear themselves with their own nails, till they can endure the smart no
longer.

[Sidenote: Imitation of the Greeks and Romans.]

And as to rebellion in particular against monarchy; one of the most
frequent causes of it, is the reading of the books of policy, and
histories of the ancient Greeks, and Romans; from which, young men, and
all others that are unprovided of the antidote of solid reason,
receiving a strong, and delightful impression, of the great exploits of
war, achieved by the conductors of their armies, receive withal a
pleasing idea, of all they have done besides; and imagine their great
prosperity, not to have proceeded from the emulation of particular men,
but from the virtue of their popular form of government: not considering
the frequent seditions, and civil wars, produced by the imperfection of
their policy. From the reading, I say, of such books, men have
undertaken to kill their kings, because the Greek and Latin writers, in
their books, and discourses of policy, make it lawful, and laudable, for
any man so to do; provided, before he do it, he call him tyrant. For
they say not _regicide_, that is, killing a king, but _tyrannicide_,
that is, killing of a tyrant is lawful. From the same books, they that
live under a monarch conceive an opinion, that the subjects in a popular
commonwealth enjoy liberty; but that in a monarchy they are all slaves.
I say, they that live under a monarchy conceive such an opinion; not
they that live under a popular government: for they find no such matter.
In sum, I cannot imagine, how anything can be more prejudicial to a
monarchy, than the allowing of such books to be publicly read, without
present applying such correctives of discreet masters, as are fit to
take away their venom: which venom I will not doubt to compare to the
biting of a mad dog, which is a disease the physicians call
_hydrophobia_, or _fear of water_. For as he that is so bitten, has a
continual torment of thirst, and yet abhorreth water; and is in such an
estate, as if the poison endeavoured to convert him into a dog: so when
a monarchy is once bitten to the quick, by those democratical writers,
that continually snarl at that estate; it wanteth nothing more than a
strong monarch, which nevertheless out of a certain _tyrannophobia_, or
fear of being strongly governed, when they have him, they abhor.

[Sidenote: The opinion that there be more sovereigns than one in the
           commonwealth.]

As there have been doctors, that hold there be three souls in a man; so
there be also that think there may be more souls, that is, more
sovereigns, than one, in a commonwealth; and set up a _supremacy_
against the _sovereignty_; _canons_ against _laws_; and a _ghostly
authority_ against the _civil_; working on men’s minds, with words and
distinctions, that of themselves signify nothing, but bewray by their
obscurity; that there walketh, as some think, invisibly another kingdom,
as it were a kingdom of fairies, in the dark. Now seeing it is manifest,
that the civil power, and the power of the commonwealth is the same
thing; and that supremacy, and the power of making canons, and granting
faculties, implieth a commonwealth; it followeth, that where one is
sovereign, another supreme; where one can make laws, and another make
canons; there must needs be two commonwealths, of one and the same
subjects; which is a kingdom divided in itself, and cannot stand. For
notwithstanding the insignificant distinction of _temporal_, and
_ghostly_, they are still two kingdoms, and every subject is subject to
two masters. For seeing the _ghostly_ power challengeth the right to
declare what is sin, it challengeth by consequence to declare what is
law, sin being nothing but the transgression of the law; and again, the
civil power challenging to declare what is law, every subject must obey
two masters, who both will have their commands be observed as law; which
is impossible. Or, if it be but one kingdom, either the _civil_, which
is the power of the commonwealth, must be subordinate to the _ghostly_,
and then there is no sovereignty but the _ghostly_; or the _ghostly_
must be subordinate to the _temporal_, and then there is no _supremacy_
but the _temporal_. When therefore these two powers oppose one another,
the commonwealth cannot but be in great danger of civil war and
dissolution. For the _civil_ authority being more visible, and standing
in the clearer light of natural reason, cannot choose but draw to it in
all times a very considerable part of the people: and the _spiritual_,
though it stand in the darkness of School distinctions, and hard words,
yet because the fear of darkness and ghosts, is greater than other
fears, cannot want a party sufficient to trouble, and sometimes to
destroy a commonwealth. And this is a disease which not unfitly may be
compared to the epilepsy, or falling sickness, which the Jews took to be
one kind of possession by spirits, in the body natural. For as in this
disease, there is an unnatural spirit, or wind in the head that
obstructeth the roots of the nerves, and moving them violently, taketh
away the motion which naturally they should have from the power of the
soul in the brain, and thereby causeth violent, and irregular motions,
which men call convulsions, in the parts; insomuch as he that is seized
therewith, falleth down sometimes into the water, and sometimes into the
fire, as a man deprived of his senses; so also in the body politic, when
the spiritual power, moveth the members of a commonwealth, by the terror
of punishments, and hope of rewards, which are the nerves of it,
otherwise than by the civil power, which is the soul of the
commonwealth, they ought to be moved; and by strange, and hard words
suffocates their understanding, it must needs thereby distract the
people, and either overwhelm the commonwealth with oppression, or cast
it into the fire of a civil war.

[Sidenote: Mixed government.]

Sometimes also in the merely civil government, there be more than one
soul; as when the power of levying money, which is the nutritive
faculty, has depended on a general assembly; the power of conduct and
command, which is the motive faculty, on one man; and the power of
making laws, which is the rational faculty, on the accidental consent,
not only of those two, but also of a third; this endangereth the
commonwealth, sometimes for want of consent to good laws; but most often
for want of such nourishment, as is necessary to life, and motion. For
although few perceive, that such government, is not government, but
division of the commonwealth into three factions, and call it mixed
monarchy; yet the truth is, that it is not one independent commonwealth,
but three independent factions; nor one representative person, but
three. In the kingdom of God, there may be three persons independent,
without breach of unity in God that reigneth; but where men reign, that
be subject to diversity of opinions, it cannot be so. And therefore if
the king bear the person of the people, and the general assembly bear
also the person of the people, and another assembly bear the person of a
part of the people, they are not one person, nor one sovereign, but
three persons, and three sovereigns.

To what disease in the natural body of man, I may exactly compare this
irregularity of a commonwealth, I know not. But I have seen a man, that
had another man growing out of his side, with a head, arms, breast, and
stomach, of his own: if he had had another man growing out of his other
side, the comparison might then have been exact.

[Sidenote: Want of money.]

Hitherto I have named such diseases of a commonwealth, as are of the
greatest, and most present danger. There be other not so great; which
nevertheless are not unfit to be observed. As first, the difficulty of
raising money, for the necessary uses of the commonwealth; especially in
the approach of war. This difficulty ariseth from the opinion, that
every subject hath a propriety in his lands and goods, exclusive of the
sovereign’s right to the use of the same. From whence it cometh to pass,
that the sovereign power, which foreseeth the necessities and dangers of
the commonwealth, finding the passage of money to the public treasury
obstructed, by the tenacity of the people, whereas it ought to extend
itself, to encounter, and prevent such dangers in their beginnings,
contracteth itself as long as it can, and when it cannot longer,
struggles with the people by stratagems of law, to obtain little sums,
which not sufficing, he is fain at last violently to open the way for
present supply, or perish; and being put often to these extremities, at
last reduceth the people to their due temper; or else the commonwealth
must perish. Insomuch as we may compare this distemper very aptly to an
ague; wherein, the fleshy parts being congealed, or by venomous matter
obstructed, the veins which by their natural course empty themselves
into the heart, are not, as they ought to be, supplied from the
arteries, whereby there succeedeth at first a cold contraction, and
trembling of the limbs; and afterward a hot, and strong endeavour of the
heart, to force a passage for the blood; and before it can do that,
contenteth itself with the small refreshments of such things as cool for
a time, till, if nature be strong enough, it break at last the contumacy
of the parts obstructed, and dissipateth the venom into sweat; or, if
nature be too weak, the patient dieth.

[Sidenote: Monopolies, and abuses of publicans.]

Again, there is sometimes in a commonwealth, a disease, which resembleth
the pleurisy; and that is, when the treasure of the commonwealth,
flowing out of its due course, is gathered together in too much
abundance, in one, or a few private men, by monopolies, or by farms of
the public revenues; in the same manner as the blood in a pleurisy,
getting into the membrane of the breast, breedeth there an inflammation,
accompanied with a fever, and painful stitches.

[Sidenote: Popular men.]

Also the popularity of a potent subject, unless the commonwealth have
very good caution of his fidelity, is a dangerous disease; because the
people, which should receive their motion from the authority of the
sovereign, by the flattery and by the reputation of an ambitious man are
drawn away from their obedience to the laws, to follow a man, of whose
virtues, and designs they have no knowledge. And this is commonly of
more danger in a popular government, than in a monarchy; because an army
is of so great force, and multitude, as it may easily be made believe,
they are the people. By this means it was, that Julius Cæsar, who was
set up by the people against the senate, having won to himself the
affections of his army, made himself master both of senate and people.
And this proceeding of popular, and ambitious men, is plain rebellion;
and may be resembled to the effects of witchcraft.

[Sidenote: Excessive greatness of a town, multitude of corporations.]

Another infirmity of a commonwealth, is the immoderate greatness of a
town, when it is able to furnish out of its own circuit, the number, and
expense of a great army: as also the great number of corporations; which
are as it were many lesser commonwealths in the bowels of a greater,
like worms in the entrails of a natural man. [Sidenote: Liberty of
disputing against sovereign power.] To which may be added, the liberty
of disputing against absolute power, by pretenders to political
prudence; which though bred for the most part in the lees of the people,
yet animated by false doctrines, are perpetually meddling with the
fundamental laws, to the molestation of the commonwealth; like the
little worms, which physicians call _ascarides_.

We may further add, the insatiable appetite, or βουλιμια, of enlarging
dominion; with the incurable _wounds_ thereby many times received from
the enemy; and the _wens_, of ununited conquests, which are many times a
burthen, and with less danger lost, than kept; as also the _lethargy_ of
ease, and _consumption_ of riot and vain expense.

[Sidenote: Dissolution of the commonwealth.]

Lastly, when in a war, foreign or intestine, the enemies get a final
victory; so as, the forces of the commonwealth keeping the field no
longer, there is no further protection of subjects in their loyalty;
then is the commonwealth DISSOLVED, and every man at liberty to protect
himself by such courses as his own discretion shall suggest unto him.
For the sovereign is the public soul, giving life and motion to the
commonwealth; which expiring, the members are governed by it no more,
than the carcase of a man, by his departed, though immortal, soul. For
though the right of a sovereign monarch cannot be extinguished by the
act of another; yet the obligation of the members may. For he that wants
protection, may seek it any where; and when he hath it, is obliged,
without fraudulent pretence of having submitted himself out of fear, to
protect his protection as long as he is able. But when the power of an
assembly is once suppressed, the right of the same perisheth utterly;
because the assembly itself is extinct; and consequently, there is no
possibility for the sovereignty to re-enter.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XXX.

                     OF THE OFFICE OF THE SOVEREIGN
                            REPRESENTATIVE.


[Sidenote: The procuration of the good of the people.]

The office of the sovereign, be it a monarch or an assembly, consisteth
in the end, for which he was trusted with the sovereign power, namely
the procuration of _the safety of the people_; to which he is obliged by
the law of nature, and to render an account thereof to God, the author
of that law, and to none but him. But by safety here, is not meant a
bare preservation, but also all other contentments of life, which every
man by lawful industry, without danger, or hurt to the commonwealth,
shall acquire to himself.

[Sidenote: By instruction and laws.]

And this is intended should be done, not by care applied to individuals,
further than their protection from injuries, when they shall complain;
but by a general providence, contained in public instruction, both of
doctrine, and example; and in the making and executing of good laws, to
which individual persons may apply their own cases.

[Sidenote: Against the duty of a sovereign to relinquish any essential
           right of sovereignty.]

And because, if the essential rights of sovereignty, specified before in
the eighteenth chapter, be taken away, the commonwealth is thereby
dissolved, and every man returneth into the condition, and calamity of a
war with every other man, which is the greatest evil that can happen in
this life; it is the office of the sovereign, to maintain those rights
entire; and consequently against his duty, first, to transfer to
another, or to lay from himself any of them. For he that deserteth the
means, deserteth the ends; and he deserteth the means, that being the
sovereign, acknowledgeth himself subject to the civil laws; and
renounceth the power of supreme judicature; or of making war, or peace
by his own authority; or of judging of the necessities of the
commonwealth; or of levying money and soldiers, when, and as much as in
his own conscience he shall judge necessary; or of making officers, and
ministers both of war and peace; or of appointing teachers, and
examining what doctrines are conformable, or contrary to the defence,
peace, and good of the people. [Sidenote: Or not to see the people
taught the grounds of them.] Secondly, it is against his duty, to let
the people be ignorant, or misinformed of the grounds, and reasons of
those his essential rights; because thereby men are easy to be seduced,
and drawn to resist him, when the commonwealth shall require their use
and exercise.

And the grounds of these rights, have the rather need to be diligently,
and truly taught; because they cannot be maintained by any civil law, or
terror of legal punishment. For a civil law, that shall forbid
rebellion, (and such is all resistance to the essential rights of the
sovereignty), is not, as a civil law, any obligation, but by virtue only
of the law of nature, that forbiddeth the violation of faith; which
natural obligation, if men know not, they cannot know the right of any
law the sovereign maketh. And for the punishment, they take it but for
an act of hostility; which when they think they have strength enough,
they will endeavour by acts of hostility, to avoid.

[Sidenote: Objection of those that say there are no principles of reason
           for absolute sovereignty.]

As I have heard some say, that justice is but a word, without substance;
and that whatsoever a man can by force, or art, acquire to himself, not
only in the condition of war, but also in a commonwealth, is his own,
which I have already showed to be false: so there be also that maintain,
that there are no grounds, nor principles of reason, to sustain those
essential rights, which make sovereignty absolute. For if there were,
they would have been found out in some place, or other; whereas we see,
there has not hitherto been any commonwealth, where those rights have
been acknowledged, or challenged. Wherein they argue as ill, as if the
savage people of America, should deny there were any grounds, or
principles of reason, so to build a house, as to last as long as the
materials, because they never yet saw any so well built. Time, and
industry, produce every day new knowledge. And as the art of well
building is derived from principles of reason, observed by industrious
men, that had long studied the nature of materials, and the divers
effects of figure, and proportion, long after mankind began, though
poorly, to build: so, long time after men have begun to constitute
commonwealths, imperfect, and apt to relapse into disorder, there may
principles of reason be found out, by industrious meditation, to make
their constitution, excepting by external violence, everlasting. And
such are those which I have in this discourse set forth: which whether
they come not into the sight of those that have power to make use of
them, or be neglected by them, or not, concerneth my particular
interests, at this day, very little. But supposing that these of mine
are not such principles of reason; yet I am sure they are principles
from authority of Scripture; as I shall make it appear, when I shall
come to speak of the kingdom of God, administered by Moses, over the
Jews, his peculiar people by covenant.

[Sidenote: Objection from the incapacity of the vulgar.]

But they say again, that though the principles be right, yet common
people are not of capacity enough to be made to understand them. I
should be glad, that the rich and potent subjects of a kingdom, or those
that are accounted the most learned, were no less incapable than they.
But all men know, that the obstructions to this kind of doctrine,
proceed not so much from the difficulty of the matter, as from the
interest of them that are to learn. Potent men, digest hardly any thing
that setteth up a power to bridle their affections; and learned men, any
thing that discovereth their errors, and thereby lesseneth their
authority: whereas the common people’s minds, unless they be tainted
with dependance on the potent, or scribbled over with the opinions of
their doctors, are like clean paper, fit to receive whatsoever by public
authority shall be imprinted in them. Shall whole nations be brought to
_acquiesce_ in the great mysteries of the Christian religion, which are
above reason, and millions of men be made believe, that the same body
may be in innumerable places at one and the same time, which is against
reason; and shall not men be able, by their teaching, and preaching,
protected by the law, to make that received, which is so consonant to
reason, that any unprejudicated man, needs no more to learn it, than to
hear it? I conclude therefore, that in the instruction of the people in
the essential rights which are the natural and fundamental laws of
sovereignty, there is no difficulty, whilst a sovereign has his power
entire, but what proceeds from his own fault, or the fault of those whom
he trusteth in the administration of the commonwealth; and consequently,
it is his duty, to cause them so to be instructed; and not only his
duty, but his benefit also, and security against the danger that may
arrive to himself in his natural person from rebellion.

[Sidenote: Subjects are to be taught not to affect change of
           government.]

And, to descend to particulars, the people are to be taught, first, that
they ought not to be in love with any form of government they see in
their neighbour nations, more than with their own, nor, whatsoever
present prosperity they behold in nations that are otherwise governed
than they, to desire change. For the prosperity of a people ruled by an
aristocratical, or democratical assembly, cometh not from aristocracy,
nor from democracy, but from the obedience, and concord of the subjects:
nor do the people flourish in a monarchy, because one man has the right
to rule them, but because they obey him. Take away in any kind of state,
the obedience, and consequently the concord of the people, and they
shall not only not flourish, but in short time be dissolved. And they
that go about by disobedience, to do no more than reform the
commonwealth, shall find they do thereby destroy it; like the foolish
daughters of Peleus, in the fable; which desiring to renew the youth of
their decrepid father, did by the counsel of Medea, cut him in pieces,
and boil him, together with strange herbs, but made not of him a new
man. This desire of change, is like the breach of the first of God’s
commandments: for there God says, _Non habebis Deos alienos_; Thou shalt
not have the Gods of other nations; and in another place concerning
_kings_, that they are _Gods_.

[Sidenote: Nor adhere, against the sovereign, to popular men.]

Secondly, they are to be taught, that they ought not to be led with
admiration of the virtue of any of their fellow-subjects, how high
soever he stand, or how conspicuously soever he shine in the
commonwealth; nor of any assembly, except the sovereign assembly, so as
to defer to them any obedience, or honour, appropriate to the sovereign
only, whom, in their particular stations, they represent; nor to receive
any influence from them, but such as is conveyed by them from the
sovereign authority. For that sovereign cannot be imagined to love his
people as he ought, that is not jealous of them, but suffers them by the
flattery of popular men, to be seduced from their loyalty, as they have
often been, not only secretly, but openly, so as to proclaim marriage
with them _in facie ecclesiæ_ by preachers, and by publishing the same
in the open streets: which may fitly be compared to the violation of the
second of the ten commandments.

[Sidenote: Nor to dispute the sovereign power.]

Thirdly, in consequence to this, they ought to be informed, how great a
fault it is, to speak evil of the sovereign representative, whether one
man, or an assembly of men; or to argue and dispute his power; or any
way to use his name irreverently, whereby he may be brought into
contempt with his people, and their obedience, in which the safety of
the commonwealth consisteth, slackened. Which doctrine the third
commandment by resemblance pointeth to.

[Sidenote: And to have days set apart to learn their duty.]

Fourthly, seeing people cannot be taught this, nor when it is taught,
remember it, nor after one generation past, so much as know in whom the
sovereign power is placed, without setting apart from their ordinary
labour, some certain times, in which they may attend those that are
appointed to instruct them; it is necessary that some such times be
determined, wherein they may assemble together, and, after prayers and
praises given to God, the sovereign of sovereigns, hear those their
duties told them, and the positive laws, such as generally concern them
all, read and expounded, and be put in mind of the authority that maketh
them laws. To this end had the Jews every seventh day, a sabbath, in
which the law was read and expounded; and in the solemnity whereof they
were put in mind, that their king was God; that having created the world
in six days, he rested the seventh day; and by their resting on it from
their labour, that that God was their king, which redeemed them from
their servile, and painful labour in Egypt, and gave them a time, after
they had rejoiced in God, to take joy also in themselves, by lawful
recreation. So that the first table of the commandments, is spent all in
setting down the sum of God’s absolute power; not only as God, but as
king by pact, in peculiar, of the Jews; and may therefore give light, to
those that have sovereign power conferred on them by the consent of men,
to see what doctrine they ought to teach their subjects.

[Sidenote: And to honour their parents.]

And because the first instruction of children, dependeth on the care of
their parents, it is necessary that they should be obedient to them,
whilst they are under their tuition; and not only so, but that also
afterwards, as gratitude requireth, they acknowledge the benefit of
their education, by external signs of honour. To which end they are to
be taught, that originally the father of every man was also his
sovereign lord, with power over him of life and death; and that the
fathers of families, when by instituting a commonwealth, they resigned
that absolute power, yet it was never intended, they should lose the
honour due unto them for their education. For to relinquish such right,
was not necessary to the institution of sovereign power; nor would there
be any reason, why any man should desire to have children, or take the
care to nourish and instruct them, if they were afterwards to have no
other benefit from them, than from other men. And this accordeth with
the fifth commandment.

[Sidenote: And to avoid doing of injury.]

Again, every sovereign ought to cause justice to be taught, which,
consisting in taking from no man what is his, is as much as to say, to
cause men to be taught not to deprive their neighbours, by violence or
fraud, of any thing which by the sovereign authority is theirs. Of
things held in propriety, those that are dearest to a man are his own
life, and limbs; and in the next degree, in most men, those that concern
conjugal affection; and after them, riches and means of living.
Therefore the people are to be taught, to abstain from violence to one
another’s person, by private revenges; from violation of conjugal
honour; and from forcible rapine, and fraudulent surreption of one
another’s goods. For which purpose also it is necessary they be showed
the evil consequences of false judgment, by corruption either of judges
or witnesses, whereby the distinction of propriety is taken away, and
justice becomes of no effect: all which things are intimated in the
sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth commandments.

[Sidenote: And to do all this sincerely from the heart.]

Lastly, they are to be taught, that not only the unjust facts, but the
designs and intentions to do them, though by accident hindered, are
injustice; which consisteth in the pravity of the will, as well as in
the irregularity of the act. And this is the intention of the tenth
commandment, and the sum of the second table; which is reduced all to
this one commandment of mutual charity, _thou shalt love thy neighbour
as thyself_: as the sum of the first table is reduced to _the love of
God_; whom they had then newly received as their king.

[Sidenote: The use of universities.]

As for the means, and conduits, by which the people may receive this
instruction, we are to search, by what means so many opinions, contrary
to the peace of mankind, upon weak and false principles, have
nevertheless been so deeply rooted in them. I mean those, which I have
in the precedent chapter specified: as that men shall judge of what is
lawful and unlawful, not by the law itself, but by their own
consciences; that is to say, by their own private judgments: that
subjects sin in obeying the commands of the commonwealth, unless they
themselves have first judged them to be lawful: that their propriety in
their riches is such, as to exclude the dominion, which the commonwealth
hath over the same: that it is lawful for subjects to kill such, as they
call tyrants: that the sovereign power may be divided, and the like;
which come to be instilled into the people by this means. They whom
necessity, or covetousness keepeth attent on their trades, and labour;
and they, on the other side, whom superfluity, or sloth carrieth after
their sensual pleasures; which two sorts of men take up the greatest
part of mankind; being diverted from the deep meditation, which the
learning of truth, not only in the matter of natural justice, but also
of all other sciences necessarily requireth, receive the notions of
their duty, chiefly from divines in the pulpit, and partly from such of
their neighbours or familiar acquaintance, as having the faculty of
discoursing readily, and plausibly, seem wiser and better learned in
cases of law and conscience, than themselves. And the divines, and such
others as make show of learning, derive their knowledge from the
universities, and from the schools of law, or from the books, which by
men, eminent in those schools and universities, have been published. It
is therefore manifest, that the instruction of the people, dependeth
wholly, on the right teaching of youth in the universities. But are not,
may some man say, the universities of England learned enough already to
do that? or is it you, will undertake to teach the universities? Hard
questions. Yet to the first, I doubt not to answer; that till towards
the latter end of Henry the Eighth, the power of the Pope, was always
upheld against the power of the commonwealth, principally by the
universities; and that the doctrines maintained by so many preachers,
against the sovereign power of the king, and by so many lawyers, and
others, that had their education there, is a sufficient argument, that
though the universities were not authors of those false doctrines, yet
they knew not how to plant the true. For in such a contradiction of
opinions, it is most certain, that they have not been sufficiently
instructed; and it is no wonder, if they yet retain a relish of that
subtle liquor, wherewith they were first seasoned, against the civil
authority. But to the latter question, it is not fit, nor needful for me
to say either aye, or no: for any man that sees what I am doing, may
easily perceive what I think.

The safety of the people, requireth further, from him, or them that have
the sovereign power, that justice be equally administered to all degrees
of people; that is, that as well the rich and mighty, as poor and
obscure persons, may be righted of the injuries done them; so as the
great, may have no greater hope of impunity, when they do violence,
dishonour, or any injury to the meaner sort, than when one of these,
does the like to one of them: for in this consisteth equity; to which,
as being a precept of the law of nature, a sovereign is as much subject,
as any of the meanest of his people. All breaches of the law, are
offences against the commonwealth: but there be some, that are also
against private persons. Those that concern the commonwealth only, may
without breach of equity be pardoned; for every man may pardon what is
done against himself, according to his own discretion. But an offence
against a private man, cannot in equity be pardoned, without the consent
of him that is injured; or reasonable satisfaction.

The inequality of subjects, proceedeth from the acts of sovereign power;
and therefore has no more place in the presence of the sovereign, that
is to say, in a court of justice, than the inequality between kings and
their subjects, in the presence of the King of kings. The honour of
great persons, is to be valued for their beneficence and the aids they
give to men of inferior rank, or not at all. And the violences,
oppressions, and injuries they do, are not extenuated, but aggravated by
the greatness of their persons; because they have least need to commit
them. The consequences of this partiality towards the great, proceed in
this manner. Impunity maketh insolence; insolence, hatred; and hatred,
an endeavour to pull down all oppressing and contumelious greatness,
though with the ruin of the commonwealth.

[Sidenote: Equal taxes.]

To equal justice, appertaineth also the equal imposition of taxes; the
equality whereof dependeth not on the equality of riches, but on the
equality of the debt that every man oweth to the commonwealth for his
defence. It is not enough, for a man to labour for the maintenance of
his life; but also to fight, if need be, for the securing of his labour.
They must either do as the Jews did after their return from captivity,
in re-edifying the temple, build with one hand, and hold the sword in
the other; or else they must hire others to fight for them. For the
impositions, that are laid on the people by the sovereign power, are
nothing else but the wages, due to them that hold the public sword, to
defend private men in the exercise of their several trades, and
callings. Seeing then the benefit that every one receiveth thereby, is
the enjoyment of life, which is equally dear to poor and rich; the debt
which a poor man oweth them that defend his life, is the same which a
rich man oweth for the defence of his; saving that the rich, who have
the service of the poor, may be debtors not only for their own persons
but for many more. Which considered, the equality of imposition,
consisteth rather in the equality of that which is consumed, than of the
riches of the persons that consume the same. For what reason is there,
that he which laboureth much, and sparing the fruits of his labour,
consumeth little, should be more charged, than he that living idly,
getteth little, and spendeth all he gets; seeing the one hath no more
protection from the commonwealth, than the other? But when the
impositions, are laid upon those things which men consume, every man
payeth equally for what he useth: nor is the commonwealth defrauded by
the luxurious waste of private men.

[Sidenote: Public charity.]

And whereas many men, by accident inevitable, become unable to maintain
themselves by their labour; they ought not to be left to the charity of
private persons; but to be provided for, as far forth as the necessities
of nature require, by the laws of the commonwealth. For as it is
uncharitableness in any man, to neglect the impotent; so it is in the
sovereign of a commonwealth, to expose them to the hazard of such
uncertain charity.

[Sidenote: Prevention of idleness.]

But for such as have strong bodies, the case is otherwise: they are to
be forced to work; and to avoid the excuse of not finding employment,
there ought to be such laws, as may encourage all manner of arts; as
navigation, agriculture, fishing, and all manner of manufacture that
requires labour. The multitude of poor, and yet strong people still
increasing, they are to be transplanted into countries not sufficiently
inhabited: where nevertheless, they are not to exterminate those they
find there; but constrain them to inhabit closer together, and not to
range a great deal of ground, to snatch what they find; but to court
each little plot with art and labour, to give them their sustenance in
due season. And when all the world is overcharged with inhabitants, then
the last remedy of all is war; which provideth for every man, by
victory, or death.

[Sidenote: Good laws, what.]

To the care of the sovereign, belongeth the making of good laws. But
what is a good law? By a good law, I mean not a just law: for no law can
be unjust. The law is made by the sovereign power, and all that is done
by such power, is warranted, and owned by every one of the people; and
that which every man will have so, no man can say is unjust. It is in
the laws of a commonwealth, as in the laws of gaming: whatsoever the
gamesters all agree on, is injustice to none of them. A good law is
that, which is _needful_, for the _good of the people_, and withal
_perspicuous_.

[Sidenote: Such as are necessary.]

For the use of laws, which are but rules authorized, is not to bind the
people from all voluntary actions; but to direct and keep them in such a
motion, as not to hurt themselves by their own impetuous desires,
rashness or indiscretion; as hedges are set, not to stop travellers, but
to keep them in their way. And therefore a law that is not needful,
having not the true end of a law, is not good. A law may be conceived to
be good, when it is for the benefit of the sovereign; though it be not
necessary for the people; but it is not so. For the good of the
sovereign and people, cannot be separated. It is a weak sovereign, that
has weak subjects; and a weak people, whose sovereign wanteth power to
rule them at his will. Unnecessary laws are not good laws; but traps for
money: which where the right of sovereign power is acknowledged, are
superfluous; and where it is not acknowledged, insufficient to defend
the people.

[Sidenote: Such as are perspicuous.]

The perspicuity, consisteth not so much in the words of the law itself,
as in a declaration of the causes, and motives for which it was made.
That is it, that shows us the meaning of the legislator; and the meaning
of the legislator known, the law is more easily understood by few, than
many words. For all words, are subject to ambiguity; and therefore
multiplication of words in the body of the law, is multiplication of
ambiguity: besides it seems to imply, by too much diligence, that
whosoever can evade the words, is without the compass of the law. And
this is a cause of many unnecessary processes. For when I consider how
short were the laws of ancient times; and how they grew by degrees still
longer; methinks I see a contention between the penners, and pleaders of
the law; the former seeking to circumscribe the latter; and the latter
to evade their circumscriptions; and that the pleaders have got the
victory. It belongeth therefore to the office of a legislator, (such as
is in all commonwealths the supreme representative, be it one man, or an
assembly), to make the reason perspicuous, why the law was made; and the
body of the law itself, as short, but in as proper, and significant
terms, as may be.

[Sidenote: Punishments.]

It belongeth also to the office of the sovereign, to make a right
application of punishments, and rewards. And seeing the end of punishing
is not revenge, and discharge of choler; but correction, either of the
offender, or of others by his example; the severest punishments are to
be inflicted for those crimes, that are of most danger to the public;
such as are those which proceed from malice to the government
established; those that spring from contempt of justice; those that
provoke indignation in the multitude; and those, which unpunished, seem
authorized, as when they are committed by sons, servants, or favourites
of men in authority. For indignation carrieth men, not only against the
actors, and authors of injustice; but against all power that is likely
to protect them; as in the case of Tarquin; when for the insolent act of
one of his sons, he was driven out of Rome, and the monarchy itself
dissolved. But crimes of infirmity; such as are those which proceed from
great provocation, from great fear, great need, or from ignorance
whether the fact be a great crime, or not, there is place many times for
lenity, without prejudice to the commonwealth; and lenity, when there is
such place for it, is required by the law of nature. The punishment of
the leaders and teachers in a commotion, not the poor seduced people,
when they are punished, can profit the commonwealth by their example. To
be severe to the people, is to punish that ignorance, which may in great
part be imputed to the sovereign, whose fault it was, that they were no
better instructed.

[Sidenote: Rewards.]

In like manner it belongeth to the office, and duty of the sovereign, to
apply his rewards always so, as there may arise from them benefit to the
commonwealth; wherein consisteth their use, and end; and is then done,
when they that have well served the commonwealth, are with as little
expense of the common treasure, as is possible, so well recompensed, as
others thereby may be encouraged, both to serve the same as faithfully
as they can, and to study the arts by which they may be enabled to do it
better. To buy with money, or preferment, from a popular ambitious
subject, to be quiet, and desist from making ill impressions in the
minds of the people, has nothing of the nature of reward; (which is
ordained not for disservice, but for service past;) nor a sign of
gratitude, but of fear; nor does it tend to the benefit, but to the
damage of the public. It is a contention with ambition, like that of
Hercules with the monster Hydra, which having many heads, for every one
that was vanquished, there grew up three. For in like manner, when the
stubbornness of one popular man, is overcome with reward, there arise
many more, by the example, that do the same mischief, in hope of like
benefit: and as all sorts of manufacture, so also malice encreaseth by
being vendible. And though sometimes a civil war, may be deferred by
such ways as that, yet the danger grows still the greater, and the
public ruin more assured. It is therefore against the duty of the
sovereign, to whom the public safety is committed, to reward those that
aspire to greatness by disturbing the peace of their country, and not
rather to oppose the beginnings of such men, with a little danger, than
after a longer time with greater.

[Sidenote: Counsellors.]

Another business of the sovereign, is to choose good counsellors; I mean
such, whose advice he is to take in the government of the commonwealth.
For this word counsel, _consilium_, corrupted from _considium_, is of a
large signification, and comprehendeth all assemblies of men that sit
together, not only to deliberate what is to be done hereafter, but also
to judge of facts past, and of law for the present. I take it here in
the first sense only: and in this sense, there is no choice of counsel,
neither in a democracy, nor aristocracy; because the persons counselling
are members of the person counselled. The choice of counsellors
therefore is proper to monarchy; in which, the sovereign that
endeavoureth not to make choice of those, that in every kind are the
most able, dischargeth not his office as he ought to do. The most able
counsellors, are they that have least hope of benefit by giving evil
counsel, and most knowledge of those things that conduce to the peace,
and defence of the commonwealth. It is a hard matter to know who
expecteth benefit from public troubles; but the signs that guide to a
just suspicion, is the soothing of the people in their unreasonable, or
irremediable grievances, by men whose estates are not sufficient to
discharge their accustomed expenses, and may easily be observed by any
one whom it concerns to know it. But to know, who has most knowledge of
the public affairs, is yet harder; and they that know them, need them a
great deal the less. For to know, who knows the rules almost of any art,
is a great degree of the knowledge of the same art; because no man can
be assured of the truth of another’s rules, but he that is first taught
to understand them. But the best signs of knowledge of any art, are,
much conversing in it, and constant good effects of it. Good counsel
comes not by lot, nor by inheritance; and therefore there is no more
reason to expect good advice from the rich or noble, in matter of state,
than in delineating the dimensions of a fortress; unless we shall think
there needs no method in the study of the politics, as there does in the
study of geometry, but only to be lookers on; which is not so. For the
politics is the harder study of the two. Whereas in these parts of
Europe, it hath been taken for a right of certain persons, to have place
in the highest council of state by inheritance; it is derived from the
conquests of the ancient Germans; wherein many absolute lords joining
together to conquer other nations, would not enter into the confederacy,
without such privileges, as might be marks of difference in time
following, between their posterity, and the posterity of their subjects;
which privileges being inconsistent with the sovereign power, by the
favour of the sovereign, they may seem to keep; but contending for them
as their right, they must needs by degrees let them go, and have at last
no further honour, than adhereth naturally to their abilities.

And how able soever be the counsellors in any affair, the benefit of
their counsel is greater, when they give every one his advice, and the
reasons of it apart, than when they do it in an assembly, by way of
orations; and when they have premeditated, than when they speak on the
sudden; both because they have more time, to survey the consequences of
action; and are less subject to be carried away to contradiction,
through envy, emulation, or other passions arising from the difference
of opinion.

The best counsel, in those things that concern not other nations, but
only the ease and benefit the subjects may enjoy, by laws that look only
inward, is to be taken from the general informations, and complaints of
the people of each province, who are best acquainted with their own
wants, and ought therefore, when they demand nothing in derogation of
the essential rights of sovereignty, to be diligently taken notice of.
For without those essential rights, as I have often before said, the
commonwealth cannot at all subsist.

[Sidenote: Commanders.]

A commander of an army in chief, if he be not popular, shall not be
beloved nor feared as he ought to be by his army; and consequently,
cannot perform that office with good success. He must therefore be
industrious, valiant, affable, liberal and fortunate, that he may gain
an opinion both of sufficiency, and of loving his soldiers. This is
popularity, and breeds in the soldiers both desire, and courage, to
recommend themselves to his favour; and protects the severity of the
general in punishing, when need is, the mutinous, or negligent soldiers.
But this love of soldiers, if caution be not given of the commander’s
fidelity, is a dangerous thing to sovereign power; especially when it is
in the hands of an assembly not popular. It belongeth therefore to the
safety of the people, both that they be good conductors, and faithful
subjects, to whom the sovereign commits his armies.

But when the sovereign himself is popular; that is, reverenced and
beloved of his people, there is no danger at all from the popularity of
a subject. For soldiers are never so generally unjust, as to side with
their captain though they love him, against their sovereign, when they
love not only his person, but also his cause. And therefore those, who
by violence have at any time suppressed the power of their lawful
sovereign, before they could settle themselves in his place, have been
always put to the trouble of contriving their titles, to save the people
from the shame of receiving them. To have a known right to sovereign
power, is so popular a quality, as he that has it needs no more, for his
own part, to turn the hearts of his subjects to him, but that they see
him able absolutely to govern his own family: nor, on the part of his
enemies, but a disbanding of their armies. For the greatest and most
active part of mankind, has never hitherto been well contented with the
present.

Concerning the offices of one sovereign to another, which are
comprehended in that law, which is commonly called the _law of nations_,
I need not say anything in this place; because the law of nations, and
the law of nature, is the same thing. And every sovereign hath the same
right, in procuring the safety of his people, that any particular man
can have, in procuring the safety of his own body. And the same law,
that dictateth to men that have no civil government, what they ought to
do, and what to avoid in regard of one another, dictateth the same to
commonwealths, that is, to the consciences of sovereign princes and
sovereign assemblies; there being no court of natural justice, but in
the conscience only; where not man, but God reigneth; whose laws, such
of them as oblige all mankind, in respect of God, as he is the author of
nature, are _natural_; and in respect of the same God, as he is King of
kings, are _laws_. But of the kingdom of God, as King of kings, and as
King also of a peculiar people, I shall speak in the rest of this
discourse.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXXI.

                    OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD BY NATURE.


[Sidenote: The scope of the following chapters.]

That the condition of mere nature, that is to say, of absolute liberty,
such as is theirs, that neither are sovereigns, nor subjects, is
anarchy, and the condition of war: that the precepts, by which men are
guided to avoid that condition, are the laws of nature: that a
commonwealth, without sovereign power, is but a word without substance,
and cannot stand: that subjects owe to sovereigns, simple obedience, in
all things wherein their obedience is not repugnant to the laws of God,
I have sufficiently proved, in that which I have already written. There
wants only, for the entire knowledge of civil duty, to know what are
those laws of God. For without that, a man knows not, when he is
commanded any thing by the civil power, whether it be contrary to the
law of God, or not: and so, either by too much civil obedience, offends
the Divine Majesty; or through fear of offending God, transgresses the
commandments of the commonwealth. To avoid both these rocks, it is
necessary to know what are the laws divine. And seeing the knowledge of
all law, dependeth on the knowledge of the sovereign power, I shall say
something in that which followeth, of the KINGDOM OF GOD.

[Sidenote: Who are subjects in the kingdom of God.]

_God is king, let the earth rejoice_, saith the psalmist, (xcvii. 1).
And again, (_Psalm_ xcix. 1) _God is king, though the nations be angry;
and he that sitteth on the cherubims, though the earth be moved_.
Whether men will or not, they must be subject always to the divine
power. By denying the existence, or providence of God, men may shake off
their ease, but not their yoke. But to call this power of God, which
extendeth itself not only to man, but also to beasts, and plants, and
bodies inanimate, by the name of kingdom, is but a metaphorical use of
the word. For he only is properly said to reign, that governs his
subjects by his word, and by promise of rewards to those that obey it,
and by threatening them with punishment that obey it not. Subjects
therefore in the kingdom of God, are not bodies inanimate, nor creatures
irrational; because they understand no precepts as his: nor atheists,
nor they that believe not that God has any care of the actions of
mankind; because they acknowledge no word for his, nor have hope of his
rewards or fear of his threatenings. They therefore that believe there
is a God that governeth the world, and hath given precepts, and
propounded rewards, and punishments to mankind, are God’s subjects; all
the rest, are to be understood as enemies.

[Sidenote: A threefold word of God, reason, revelation, prophecy.]

To rule by words, requires that such words be manifestly made known; for
else they are no laws: for to the nature of laws belongeth a sufficient,
and clear promulgation, such as may take away the excuse of ignorance;
which in the laws of men is but of one only kind, and that is,
proclamation, or promulgation by the voice of man. But God declareth his
laws three ways; by the dictates of _natural reason_, by _revelation_,
and by the _voice_ of some _man_, to whom by the operation of miracles,
he procureth credit with the rest. From hence there ariseth a triple
word of God, _rational_, _sensible_, and _prophetic_: to which
correspondeth a triple hearing; _right reason_, _sense supernatural_,
and _faith_. As for sense supernatural, which consisteth in revelation
or inspiration, there have not been any universal laws so given, because
God speaketh not in that manner but to particular persons, and to divers
men divers things.

[Sidenote: A twofold kingdom of God, natural and prophetic.]

From the difference between the other two kinds of God’s word,
_rational_, and _prophetic_, there may be attributed to God, a twofold
kingdom, _natural_, and _prophetic_: natural, wherein he governeth as
many of mankind as acknowledge his providence, by the natural dictates
of right reason; and prophetic, wherein having chosen out one peculiar
nation, the Jews, for his subjects, he governed them, and none but them,
not only by natural reason, but by positive laws, which he gave them by
the mouths of his holy prophets. Of the natural kingdom of God I intend
to speak in this chapter.

[Sidenote: The right of God’s sovereignty is derived from his
           omnipotence.]

The right of nature, whereby God reigneth over men, and punisheth those
that break his laws, is to be derived, not from his creating them, as if
he required obedience as of gratitude for his benefits; but from his
_irresistible power_. I have formerly shown, how the sovereign right
ariseth from pact: to show how the same right may arise from nature,
requires no more, but to show in what case it is never taken away.
Seeing all men by nature had right to all things, they had right every
one to reign over all the rest. But because this right could not be
obtained by force, it concerned the safety of every one, laying by that
right, to set up men, with sovereign authority, by common consent, to
rule and defend them: whereas if there had been any man of power
irresistible, there had been no reason, why he should not by that power
have ruled and defended both himself, and them, according to his own
discretion. To those therefore whose power is irresistible, the dominion
of all men adhereth naturally by their excellence of power; and
consequently it is from that power, that the kingdom over men, and the
right of afflicting men at his pleasure, belongeth naturally to God
Almighty; not as Creator, and gracious; but as omnipotent. And though
punishment be due for sin only, because by that word is understood
affliction for sin; yet the right of afflicting, is not always derived
from men’s sin, but from God’s power.

[Sidenote: Sin not the cause of all affliction.]

This question, _why evil men often prosper, and good men suffer
adversity_, has been much disputed by the ancient, and is the same with
this of ours, _by what right God dispenseth the prosperities and
adversities of this life_; and is of that difficulty, as it hath shaken
the faith, not only of the vulgar, but of philosophers, and which is
more, of the Saints, concerning the Divine Providence. _How good_, saith
David, (_Psalm_ lxxiii. 1, 2, 3) _is the God of Israel to those that are
upright in heart; and yet my feet were almost gone, my treadings had
well-nigh slipt; for I was grieved at the wicked, when I saw the ungodly
in such prosperity_. And Job, how earnestly does he expostulate with
God, for the many afflictions he suffered, notwithstanding his
righteousness? This question in the case of Job, is decided by God
himself, not by arguments derived from Job’s sin, but his own power. For
whereas the friends of Job drew their arguments from his affliction to
his sin, and he defended himself by the conscience of his innocence, God
himself taketh up the matter, and having justified the affliction by
arguments drawn from his power, such as this, (_Job_ xxxviii. 4) _Where
wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the earth?_ and the like, both
approved Job’s innocence, and reproved the erroneous doctrine of his
friends. Conformable to this doctrine is the sentence of our Saviour,
concerning the man that was born blind, in these words, _Neither hath
this man sinned, nor his fathers; but that the works of God might be
made manifest in him_. And though it be said, _that death entered into
the world by sin_, (by which is meant, that if Adam had never sinned, he
had never died, that is, never suffered any separation of his soul from
his body,) it follows not thence, that God could not justly have
afflicted him, though he had not sinned, as well as he afflicteth other
living creatures, that cannot sin.

[Sidenote: Divine laws.]

Having spoken of the right of God’s sovereignty, as grounded only on
nature; we are to consider next, what are the Divine laws, or dictates
of natural reason; which laws concern either the natural duties of one
man to another, or the honour naturally due to our Divine Sovereign. The
first are the same laws of nature, of which I have spoken already in the
fourteenth and fifteenth chapters of this treatise; namely, equity,
justice, mercy, humility, and the rest of the moral virtues. It
remaineth therefore that we consider, what precepts are dictated to men,
by their natural reason only, without other word of God, touching the
honour and worship of the Divine Majesty.

[Sidenote: Honour and worship, what.]

Honour consisteth in the inward thought, and opinion of the power, and
goodness of another; and therefore to honour God, is to think as highly
of his power and goodness, as is possible. And of that opinion, the
external signs appearing in the words and actions of men, are called
_worship_; which is one part of that which the Latins understand by the
word _cultus_. For _cultus_ signifieth properly, and constantly, that
labour which a man bestows on anything, with a purpose to make benefit
by it. Now those things whereof we make benefit, are either subject to
us, and the profit they yield, followeth the labour we bestow upon them,
as a natural effect; or they are not subject to us, but answer our
labour, according to their own wills. In the first sense the labour
bestowed on the earth, is called _culture_; and the education of
children, a _culture_ of their minds. In the second sense, where men’s
wills are to be wrought to our purpose, not by force, but by
complaisance, it signifieth as much as courting, that is, a winning of
favour by good offices; as by praises, by acknowledging their power, and
by whatsoever is pleasing to them from whom we look for any benefit. And
this is properly _worship_: in which sense _Publicola_, is understood
for a worshipper of the people; and _cultus Dei_, for the worship of
God.

[Sidenote: Several signs of honour.]

From internal honour, consisting in the opinion of power and goodness,
arise three passions; _love_, which hath reference to goodness; and
_hope_, and _fear_, that relate to power: and three parts of external
worship; _praise_, _magnifying_, and _blessing_: the subject of praise,
being goodness; the subject of magnifying and blessing, being power, and
the effect thereof felicity. Praise, and magnifying are signified both
by words, and actions: by words, when we say a man is good, or great: by
actions, when we thank him for his bounty, and obey his power. The
opinion of the happiness of another, can only be expressed by words.

[Sidenote: Worship natural and arbitrary.]

There be some signs of honour, both in attributes and actions, that be
naturally so; as amongst attributes, _good_, _just_, _liberal_, and the
like; and amongst actions, _prayers_, _thanks_, and _obedience_. Others
are so by institution, or custom of men; and in some times and places
are honourable; in others, dishonourable; in others, indifferent: such
as are the gestures in salutation, prayer, and thanksgiving, in
different times and places, differently used. The former is _natural_;
the latter _arbitrary_ worship.

[Sidenote: Worship commanded and free.]

And of arbitrary worship, there be two differences: for sometimes it is
a _commanded_, sometimes _voluntary_ worship: commanded, when it is such
as he requireth, who is worshipped: free, when it is such as the
worshipper thinks fit. When it is commanded, not the words, or gesture,
but the obedience is the worship. But when free, the worship consists in
the opinion of the beholders: for if to them the words, or actions by
which we intend honour, seem ridiculous, and tending to contumely, they
are no worship, because no signs of honour; and no signs of honour,
because a sign is not a sign to him that giveth it, but to him to whom
it is made, that is, to the spectator.

[Sidenote: Worship public and private.]

Again, there is a _public_, and a _private_ worship. Public, is the
worship that a commonwealth performeth, as one person. Private, is that
which a private person exhibiteth. Public, in respect of the whole
commonwealth, is free; but in respect of particular men, it is not so.
Private, is in secret free; but in the sight of the multitude, it is
never without some restraint, either from the laws, or from the opinion
of men; which is contrary to the nature of liberty.

[Sidenote: The end of worship.]

The end of worship amongst men, is power. For where a man seeth another
worshipped, he supposeth him powerful, and is the readier to obey him;
which makes his power greater. But God has no ends: the worship we do
him, proceeds from our duty, and is directed according to our capacity,
by those rules of honour, that reason dictateth to be done by the weak
to the more potent men, in hope of benefit, for fear of damage, or in
thankfulness for good already received from them.

[Sidenote: Attributes of divine honour.]

That we may know what worship of God is taught us by the light of
nature, I will begin with his attributes. Where, first, it is manifest,
we ought to attribute to him _existence_. For no man can have the will
to honour that, which he thinks not to have any being.

Secondly, that those philosophers, who said the world, or the soul of
the world was God, spake unworthily of him; and denied his existence.
For by God, is understood the cause of the world; and to say the world
is God, is to say there is no cause of it, that is, no God.

Thirdly, to say the world was not created, but eternal, seeing that
which is eternal has no cause, is to deny there is a God.

Fourthly, that they who attributing, as they think, ease to God, take
from him the care of mankind; take from him his honour: for it takes
away men’s love, and fear of him; which is the root of honour.

Fifthly, in those things that signify greatness, and power; to say he is
_finite_, is not to honour him: for it is not a sign of the will to
honour God, to attribute to him less than we can; and finite, is less
than we can; because to finite, it is easy to add more.

Therefore to attribute _figure_ to him, is not honour; for all figure is
finite:

Nor to say we conceive, and imagine, or have an _idea_ of him, in our
mind: for whatsoever we conceive is finite:

Nor to attribute to him _parts_, or _totality_; which are the attributes
only of things finite:

Nor to say he is in this, or that _place_: for whatsoever is in place,
is bounded, and finite: Nor that he is _moved_, or _resteth_: for both
these attributes ascribe to him place:

Nor that there be more Gods than one; because it implies them all
finite: for there cannot be more than one infinite:

Nor to ascribe to him, (unless metaphorically, meaning not the passion
but the effect,) passions that partake of grief; as _repentance_,
_anger_, _mercy_: or of want; as _appetite_, _hope_, _desire_; or of any
passive faculty: for passion, is power limited by somewhat else.

And therefore when we ascribe to God a _will_, it is not to be
understood, as that of man, for a _rational appetite_; but as the power,
by which he effecteth every thing.

Likewise when we attribute to him _sight_, and other acts of sense; as
also _knowledge_, and _understanding_; which in us is nothing else, but
a tumult of the mind, raised by external things that press the organical
parts of man’s body: for there is no such thing in God; and being things
that depend on natural causes, cannot be attributed to him.

He that will attribute to God, nothing but what is warranted by natural
reason, must either use such negative attributes, as _infinite_,
_eternal_, _incomprehensible_; or superlatives, as _most high_, _most
great_, and the like; or indefinite, as _good_, _just_, _holy_,
_creator_; and in such sense, as if he meant not to declare what he is,
(for that were to circumscribe him within the limits of our fancy,) but
how much we admire him, and how ready we would be to obey him; which is
a sign of humility, and of a will to honour him as much as we can. For
there is but one name to signify our conception of his nature, and that
is, I AM: and but one name of his relation to us, and that is, _God_; in
which is contained Father, King, and Lord.

[Sidenote: Actions that are signs of divine honour.]

Concerning the actions of divine worship, it is a most general precept
of reason, that they be signs of the intention to honour God; such as
are, first, _prayers_. For not the carvers, when they made images, were
thought to make them gods; but the people that _prayed_ to them.

Secondly, _thanksgiving_; which differeth from prayer in divine worship,
no otherwise, than that prayers precede, and thanks succeed the benefit;
the end, both of the one and the other, being to acknowledge God, for
author of all benefits, as well past, as future.

Thirdly, _gifts_, that is to say, _sacrifices_ and _oblations_, if they
be of the best, are signs of honour: for they are thanksgivings.

Fourthly, _not to swear by any but God_, is naturally a sign of honour:
for it is a confession that God only knoweth the heart; and that no
man’s wit or strength can protect a man against God’s vengeance on the
perjured.

Fifthly, it is a part of rational worship, to speak considerately of
God; for it argues a fear of him, and fear is a confession of his power.
Hence followeth, that the name of God is not to be used rashly, and to
no purpose; for that is as much, as in vain: and it is to no purpose,
unless it be by way of oath, and by order of the commonwealth, to make
judgments certain; or between commonwealths, to avoid war. And that
disputing of God’s nature is contrary to his honour: for it is supposed,
that in this natural kingdom of God, there is no other way to know
anything, but by natural reason, that is, from the principles of natural
science; which are so far from teaching us any thing of God’s nature, as
they cannot teach us our own nature, nor the nature of the smallest
creature living. And therefore, when men out of the principles of
natural reason, dispute of the attributes of God, they but dishonour
him: for in the attributes which we give to God, we are not to consider
the signification of philosophical truth; but the signification of pious
intention, to do him the greatest honour we are able. From the want of
which consideration, have proceeded the volumes of disputation about the
nature of God, that tend not to his honour, but to the honour of our own
wits and learning; and are nothing else but inconsiderate and vain
abuses of his sacred name.

Sixthly, in _prayers_, _thanksgivings_, _offerings_, and _sacrifices_,
it is a dictate of natural reason, that they be every one in his kind
the best, and most significant of honour. As for example, that prayers
and thanksgiving, be made in words and phrases, not sudden, nor light,
nor plebeian; but beautiful, and well composed. For else we do not God
as much honour as we can. And therefore the heathens did absurdly, to
worship images for gods: but their doing it in verse, and with music,
both of voice and instruments, was reasonable. Also that the beasts they
offered in sacrifice, and the gifts they offered, and their actions in
worshipping, were full of submission, and commemorative of benefits
received, was according to reason, as proceeding from an intention to
honour him.

Seventhly, reason directeth not only to worship God in secret; but also,
and especially, in public, and in the sight of men. For without that,
that which in honour is most acceptable, the procuring others to honour
him, is lost.

Lastly, obedience to his laws, that is, in this case to the laws of
nature, is the greatest worship of all. For as obedience is more
acceptable to God than sacrifice; so also to set light by his
commandments, is the greatest of all contumelies. And these are the laws
of that divine worship, which natural reason dictateth to private men.

[Sidenote: Public worship consisteth in uniformity.]

But seeing a commonwealth is but one person, it ought also to exhibit to
God but one worship; which then it doth, when it commandeth it to be
exhibited by private men, publicly. And this is public worship; the
property whereof, is to be _uniform_: for those actions that are done
differently, by different men, cannot be said to be a public worship.
And therefore, where many sorts of worship be allowed, proceeding from
the different religions of private men, it cannot be said there is any
public worship, nor that the commonwealth is of any religion at all.

[Sidenote: All attributes depend on the laws civil.]

And because words, and consequently the attributes of God, have their
signification by agreement and constitution of men, those attributes are
to be held significative of honour, that men intend shall so be; and
whatsoever may be done by the wills of particular men, where there is no
law but reason, may be done by the will of the commonwealth, by laws
civil. And because a commonwealth hath no will, nor makes no laws, but
those that are made by the will of him, or them that have the sovereign
power; it followeth that those attributes which the sovereign ordaineth,
in the worship of God, for signs of honour, ought to be taken and used
for such, by private men in their public worship.

[Sidenote: Not all actions.]

But because not all actions are signs by constitution, but some are
naturally signs of honour, others of contumely; these latter, which are
those that men are ashamed to do in the sight of them they reverence,
cannot be made by human power a part of Divine worship; nor the former,
such as are decent, modest, humble behaviour, ever be separated from it.
But whereas there be an infinite number of actions and gestures of an
indifferent nature; such of them as the commonwealth shall ordain to be
publicly and universally in use, as signs of honour, and part of God’s
worship, are to be taken and used for such by the subjects. And that
which is said in the Scripture, _It is better to obey God than man_,
hath place in the kingdom of God by pact, and not by nature.

[Sidenote: Natural punishments.]

Having thus briefly spoken of the natural kingdom of God, and his
natural laws, I will add only to this chapter a short declaration of his
natural punishments. There is no action of man in this life, that is not
the beginning of so long a chain of consequences, as no human providence
is high enough, to give a man a prospect to the end. And in this chain,
there are linked together both pleasing and unpleasing events; in such
manner, as he that will do anything for his pleasure, must engage
himself to suffer all the pains annexed to it; and these pains, are the
natural punishments of those actions, which are the beginning of more
harm than good. And hereby it comes to pass, that intemperance is
naturally punished with diseases; rashness, with mischances; injustice,
with the violence of enemies; pride, with ruin; cowardice, with
oppression; negligent government of princes, with rebellion; and
rebellion, with slaughter. For seeing punishments are consequent to the
breach of laws; natural punishments must be naturally consequent to the
breach of the laws of nature; and therefore follow them as their
natural, not arbitrary effects.

[Sidenote: The conclusion of the second part.]

And thus far concerning the constitution, nature, and right of
sovereigns, and concerning the duty of subjects, derived from the
principles of natural reason. And now, considering how different this
doctrine is, from the practice of the greatest part of the world,
especially of these western parts, that have received their moral
learning from Rome and Athens; and how much depth of moral philosophy is
required, in them that have the administration of the sovereign power; I
am at the point of believing this my labour, as useless, as the
commonwealth of Plato. For he also is of opinion that it is impossible
for the disorders of state, and change of governments by civil war, ever
to be taken away, till sovereigns be philosophers. But when I consider
again, that the science of natural justice, is the only science
necessary for sovereigns and their principal ministers; and that they
need not be charged with the sciences mathematical, as by Plato they
are, farther than by good laws to encourage men to the study of them;
and that neither Plato, nor any other philosopher hitherto, hath put
into order, and sufficiently or probably proved all the theorems of
moral doctrine, that men may learn thereby, both how to govern, and how
to obey; I recover some hope, that one time or other, this writing of
mine may fall into the hands of a sovereign, who will consider it
himself, (for it is short, and I think clear,) without the help of any
interested, or envious interpreter; and by the exercise of entire
sovereignty, in protecting the public teaching of it, convert this truth
of speculation, into the utility of practice.




                               PART III.

                                  OF A
                        CHRISTIAN COMMONWEALTH.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXXII.

                OF THE PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN POLITICS.


[Sidenote: The word of God delivered by prophets is the main principle
           of Christian politics.]

I have derived the rights of sovereign power, and the duty of subjects,
hitherto from the principles of nature only; such as experience has
found true, or consent concerning the use of words has made so; that is
to say, from the nature of men, known to us by experience, and from
definitions of such words as are essential to all political reasoning,
universally agreed on. But in that I am next to handle, which is the
nature and rights of a CHRISTIAN COMMONWEALTH, whereof there dependeth
much upon supernatural revelations of the will of God; the ground of my
discourse must be, not only the natural word of God, but also the
prophetical.

[Sidenote: Yet is not natural reason to be renounced.]

Nevertheless, we are not to renounce our senses, and experience; nor,
that which is the undoubted word of God, our natural reason. For they
are the talents which he hath put into our hands to negotiate, till the
coming again of our blessed Saviour; and therefore not to be folded up
in the napkin of an implicit faith, but employed in the purchase of
justice, peace, and true religion. For though there be many things in
God’s word above reason; that it is to say, which cannot by natural
reason be either demonstrated, or confuted; yet there is nothing
contrary to it; but when it seemeth so, the fault is either in our
unskilful interpretation, or erroneous ratiocination.

Therefore, when anything therein written is too hard for our
examination, we are bidden to captivate our understanding to the words;
and not to labour in sifting out a philosophical truth by logic, of such
mysteries as are not comprehensible, nor fall under any rule of natural
science. For it is with the mysteries of our religion, as with wholesome
pills for the sick; which swallowed whole, have the virtue to cure; but
chewed, are for the most part cast up again without effect.

[Sidenote: What it is to captivate the understanding.]

But by the captivity of our understanding, is not meant a submission of
the intellectual faculty to the opinion of any other man; but of the
will to obedience, where obedience is due. For sense, memory,
understanding, reason, and opinion are not in our power to change; but
always, and necessarily such, as the things we see, hear, and consider
suggest unto us; and therefore are not effects of our will, but our will
of them. We then captivate our understanding and reason, when we forbear
contradiction; when we so speak, as by lawful authority we are
commanded; and when we live accordingly; which, in sum, is trust and
faith reposed in him that speaketh, though the mind be incapable of any
notion at all from the words spoken.

[Sidenote: How God speaketh to men.]

When God speaketh to man, it must be either immediately; or by mediation
of another man, to whom he had formerly spoken by himself immediately.
How God speaketh to a man immediately, may be understood by those well
enough, to whom he hath so spoken; but how the same should be understood
by another, is hard, if not impossible to know. For if a man pretend to
me, that God hath spoken to him supernaturally and immediately, and I
make doubt of it, I cannot easily perceive what argument he can produce,
to oblige me to believe it. It is true, that if he be my sovereign, he
may oblige me to obedience, so, as not by act or word to declare I
believe him not; but not to think any otherwise than my reason persuades
me. But if one that hath not such authority over me, should pretend the
same, there is nothing that exacteth either belief, or obedience.

For to say that God hath spoken to him in the Holy Scripture, is not to
say God hath spoken to him immediately, but by mediation of the
prophets, or of the apostles, or of the church, in such manner as he
speaks to all other Christian men. To say he hath spoken to him in a
dream, is no more than to say he dreamed that God spake to him; which is
not of force to win belief from any man, that knows dreams are for the
most part natural, and may proceed from former thoughts; and such dreams
as that, from self-conceit, and foolish arrogance, and false opinion of
a man’s own godliness, or other virtue, by which he thinks he hath
merited the favour of extraordinary revelation. To say he hath seen a
vision, or heard a voice, is to say, that he hath dreamed between
sleeping and waking: for in such manner a man doth many times naturally
take his dream for a vision, as not having well observed his own
slumbering. To say he speaks by supernatural inspiration, is to say he
finds an ardent desire to speak, or some strong opinion of himself, for
which he can allege no natural and sufficient reason. So that though God
Almighty can speak to a man by dreams, visions, voice, and inspiration;
yet he obliges no man to believe he hath so done to him that pretends
it; who, being a man, may err, and, which is more, may lie.

[Sidenote: By what marks prophets are known.]

How then can he, to whom God hath never revealed his will immediately,
saving by the way of natural reason, know when he is to obey, or not to
obey his word, delivered by him that says he is a prophet? Of four
hundred prophets, of whom the king of Israel asked counsel, concerning
the war he made against Ramoth Gilead, (_1 Kings_, xxii.) only Micaiah
was a true one. The prophet that was sent to prophecy against the altar
set up by Jeroboam, (_1 Kings_, xiii.) though a true prophet, and that
by two miracles done in his presence, appears to be a prophet sent from
God, was yet deceived by another old prophet, that persuaded him as from
the mouth of God, to eat and drink with him. If one prophet deceive
another, what certainty is there of knowing the will of God, by other
way than that of reason? To which I answer out of the Holy Scripture,
that there be two marks, by which together, not asunder, a true prophet
is to be known. One is the doing of miracles; the other is the not
teaching any other religion than that which is already established.
Asunder, I say, neither of these is sufficient. _If a prophet rise
amongst you, or a dreamer of dreams, and shall pretend the doing of a
miracle and the miracle come to pass; if he say, Let us follow strange
Gods, which thou hast not known, thou shalt not hearken to him, &c. But
that prophet and dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, because he
hath spoken to you to revolt from the Lord your God._ (_Deut._ xiii.
1-5.) In which words two things are to be observed; first, that God will
not have miracles alone serve for arguments, to approve the prophet’s
calling; but, as it is in the third verse, for an experiment of the
constancy of our adherence to himself. For the works of the Egyptian
sorcerers, though not so great as those of Moses, yet were great
miracles. Secondly, that how great soever the miracle be, yet if it tend
to stir up revolt against the king, or him that governeth by the king’s
authority, he that doth such miracle, is not to be considered otherwise
than as sent to make trial of their allegiance. For these words, _revolt
from the Lord your God_, are in this place equivalent to _revolt from
your king_. For they had made God their king by pact at the foot of
Mount Sinai; who ruled them by Moses only; for he only spake with God,
and from time to time declared God’s commandments to the people. In like
manner, after our Saviour Christ had made his disciples acknowledge him
for the Messiah, (that is to say, for God’s anointed, whom the nation of
the Jews daily expected for their king, but refused when he came,) he
omitted not to advertise them of the danger of miracles. _There shall
arise_, saith he, _false Christs, and false prophets, and shall do great
wonders and miracles, even to the seducing, if it were possible, of the
very elect_. (_Matt._ xxiv. 24.) By which it appears, that false
prophets may have the power of miracles; yet are we not to take their
doctrine for God’s word. St. Paul says farther to the Galatians, (_Gal._
i. 8.) that _if himself, or an angel from heaven preach another gospel
to them, than he had preached, let him be accursed_. That gospel was,
that Christ was King; so that all preaching against the power of the
king received, in consequence to these words, is by St. Paul accursed.
For his speech is addressed to those, who by his preaching had already
received Jesus for the Christ, that is to say, for King of the Jews.

[Sidenote: The marks of a prophet in the old law, miracles, and doctrine
           comformable to the law.]

And as miracles, without preaching that doctrine which God hath
established; so preaching the true doctrine, without the doing of
miracles, is an insufficient argument of immediate revelation. For if a
man that teacheth not false doctrine, should pretend to be a prophet
without showing any miracle, he is never the more to be regarded for his
pretence, as is evident by _Deut._ xviii. v. 21, 22, _If thou say in thy
heart, How shall we know that the word_ (of the prophet) _is not that
which the Lord hath spoken? when the prophet shall have spoken in the
name of the Lord, that which shall not come to pass, that is the word
which the Lord hath not spoken, but the prophet has spoken it out of the
pride of his own heart, fear him not._ But a man may here again ask,
when the prophet hath foretold a thing, how shall we know whether it
will come to pass or not? For he may foretell it as a thing to arrive
after a certain long time, longer than the time of man’s life; or
indefinitely, that it will come to pass one time or other: in which case
this mark of a prophet is unuseful; and therefore the miracles that
oblige us to believe a prophet, ought to be confirmed by an immediate,
or a not long deferred event. So that it is manifest, that the teaching
of the religion which God hath established, and the showing of a present
miracle, joined together, were the only marks whereby the Scripture
would have a true prophet, that is to say, immediate revelation, to be
acknowledged; neither of them being singly sufficient to oblige any
other man to regard what he saith.

[Sidenote: Miracles ceasing, prophets cease, and the Scripture supplies
           their place.]

Seeing therefore miracles now cease, we have no sign left, whereby to
acknowledge the pretended revelations or inspirations of any private
man; nor obligation to give ear to any doctrine, farther than it is
conformable to the Holy Scriptures, which since the time of our Saviour,
supply the place, and sufficiently recompense the want of all other
prophecy; and from which, by wise and learned interpretation, and
careful ratiocination, all rules and precepts necessary to the knowledge
of our duty both to God and man, without enthusiasm or supernatural
inspiration, may easily be deduced. And this Scripture is it, out of
which I am to take the principles of my discourse, concerning the rights
of those that are the supreme governors on earth of Christian
commonwealths; and of the duty of Christian subjects towards their
sovereigns. And to that end, I shall speak in the next chapter, of the
books, writers, scope and authority of the Bible.


                                -------


                            CHAPTER XXXIII.

               OF THE NUMBER, ANTIQUITY, SCOPE, AUTHORITY
                    AND INTERPRETERS OF THE BOOKS OF
                            HOLY SCRIPTURE.


[Sidenote: Of the books of Holy Scripture.]

By the Books of Holy SCRIPTURE, are understood those, which ought to be
the _canon_, that is to say, the rules of Christian life.

And because all rules of life, which men are in conscience bound to
observe, are laws; the question of the Scripture, is the question of
what is law throughout all Christendom, both natural and civil. For
though it be not determined in Scripture, what laws every Christian king
shall constitute in his own dominions; yet it is determined what laws he
shall not constitute. Seeing therefore I have already proved, that
sovereigns in their own dominions are the sole legislators; those books
only are canonical, that is, law, in every nation, which are established
for such by the sovereign authority. It is true, that God is the
sovereign of all sovereigns; and therefore, when he speaks to any
subject, he ought to be obeyed, whatsoever any earthly potentate command
to the contrary. But the question is not of obedience to God, but of
_when_ and _what_ God hath said; which to subjects that have no
supernatural revelation, cannot be known, but by that natural reason,
which guideth them, for the obtaining of peace and justice, to obey the
authority of their several commonwealths, that is to say, of their
lawful sovereigns. According to this obligation, I can acknowledge no
other books of the Old Testament, to be Holy Scripture, but those which
have been commanded to be acknowledged for such, by the authority of the
Church of England. What books these are, is sufficiently known, without
a catalogue of them here; and they are the same that are acknowledged by
St. Jerome, who holdeth the rest, namely, the _Wisdom of Solomon_,
_Ecclesiasticus_, _Judith_, _Tobias_, the first and the second of
_Maccabees_, (though he had seen the first in Hebrew,) and the third and
fourth of _Esdras_, for _Apocrypha_. Of the canonical, Josephus, a
learned Jew, that wrote in the time of the emperor Domitian, reckoneth
_twenty-two_, making the number agree with the Hebrew alphabet. St.
Jerome does the same, though they reckon them in different manner. For
Josephus numbers _five_ Books of _Moses_, _thirteen_ of _Prophets_ that
writ the history of their own times, (which how it agrees with the
prophets’ writings contained in the Bible we shall see hereafter,) and
_four_ of _hymns_ and moral precepts. But St. Jerome reckons _five_
books of _Moses_, _eight_ of _Prophets_, and _nine_ of other Holy Writ,
which he calls of ἁγιόγραφα. The Septuagint, who were seventy learned
men of the Jews, sent for by Ptolemy, king of Egypt, to translate the
Jewish law out of the Hebrew into the Greek, have left us no other for
Holy Scripture in the Greek tongue, but the same that are received in
the Church of England.

[Sidenote: Their antiquity.]

As for the Books of the New Testament, they are equally acknowledged for
canon by all Christian churches, and by all sects of Christians, that
admit any books at all for canonical.

Who were the original writers of the several Books of Holy Scripture,
has not been made evident by any sufficient testimony of other history,
which is the only proof of matter of fact; nor can be, by any arguments
of natural reason: for reason serves only to convince the truth, not of
fact, but, of consequence. The light therefore that must guide us in
this question, must be that which is held out unto us from the books
themselves: and this light, though it show us not the writer of every
book, yet it is not unuseful to give us knowledge of the time, wherein
they were written.

[Sidenote: The Pentateuch not written by Moses.]

And first, for the _Pentateuch_, it is not argument enough that they
were written by Moses, because they are called the five Books of
_Moses_; no more than these titles, the Book of _Joshua_, the Book of
_Judges_, the Book of _Ruth_, and the Books of the _Kings_, are
arguments sufficient to prove, that they were written by _Joshua_, by
the _Judges_, by _Ruth_, and by the _Kings_. For in titles of books, the
subject is marked, as often as the writer. The history of Livy, denotes
the writer; but the history of Scanderberg, is denominated from the
subject. We read in the last chapter of _Deuteronomy_, verse 6th,
concerning the sepulchre of Moses, _that no man knoweth of his sepulchre
to this day_, that is, to to the day wherein those words were written.
It is therefore manifest, that those words were written after his
interment. For it were a strange interpretation, to say Moses spake of
his own sepulchre, though by prophecy, that it was not found to that
day, wherein he was yet living. But it may perhaps be alleged, that the
last chapter only, not the whole Pentateuch, was written by some other
man, but the rest not. Let us therefore consider that which we find in
the book of Genesis, (xii. 6.) _And Abraham passed through the land to
the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh, and the_ Canaanite _was
then in the land_; which must needs be the words of one that wrote when
the Canaanite was not in the land; and consequently, not of Moses, who
died before he came into it. Likewise _Numbers_, xxi. 14, the writer
citeth another more ancient book, entitled, _The Book of the Wars of the
Lord_, wherein were registered the acts of Moses, at the Red Sea, and at
the brook of Arnon. It is therefore sufficiently evident, that the five
Books of Moses were written after his time, though how long after it be
not so manifest.

But though Moses did not compile those books entirely, and in the form
we have them; yet he wrote all that which he is there said to have
written: as for example, the Volume of the Law, which is contained, as
it seemeth, in the xith. of _Deuteronomy_, and the following chapters to
the xxviith. which was also commanded to be written on stones, in their
entry into the land of Canaan. And this also did Moses himself write,
(_Deut._ xxxi. 9, 10) and delivered to the priests and elders of Israel,
to be read every seventh year to all Israel, at their assembling in the
Feast of Tabernacles. And this is that law which God commanded, that
their kings, when they should have established that form of government,
should take a copy of from the priests and Levites: and which Moses
commanded the priests and Levites to lay in the side of the ark,
(_Deut._ xxxi. 26); and the same which having been lost, was long time
after found again by Hilkiah, and sent to king Josias (_2 Kings_ xxii.
8) who causing it to be read to the people, (_2 Kings_ xxiii. 1, 2, 3)
renewed the covenant between God and them.

[Sidenote: The book of Joshua written after his time.]

That the book of _Joshua_ was also written long after the time of
Joshua, may be gathered out of many places of the book itself. Joshua
had set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, for a monument of their
passage; of which the writer saith thus, _They are there unto this day_
(_Josh._ iv. 9); for _unto this day_, is a phrase that signifieth a time
past, beyond the memory of man. In like manner, upon the saying of the
Lord, that he had rolled off from the people the reproach of Egypt, the
writer saith, _The place is called Gilgal unto this day_ (_Josh._ v. 9);
which to have said in the time of Joshua had been improper. So also the
name of the valley of Achor, from the trouble that Achan raised in the
camp, the writer saith, _remaineth unto this day_ (_Josh._ vii. 26);
which must needs be therefore long after the time of Joshua. Arguments
of this kind there be many other; as _Josh._ viii. 29, xiii. 13, xiv.
14, xv. 63.

[Sidenote: The books of Judges and Ruth written long after the
           captivity.]

The same is manifest by like arguments of the book of _Judges_, chap. i.
21, 26, vi. 24, x. 4, xv. 19, xvii. 6, and _Ruth_ i. 1; but especially
_Judg._ xviii. 30, where it is said, that _Jonathan and his sons were
priests to the tribe of Dan, until the day of the captivity of the
land_.

[Sidenote: The like of the books of Samuel.]

That the books of _Samuel_ were also written after his own time, there
are the like arguments, _1 Sam._ v. 5, vii. 13, 15; xxvii, 6, and xxx.
25, where, after David had adjudged equal part of the spoils, to them
that guarded the ammunition, with them that fought, the writer saith,
_He made it a statute and an ordinance to Israel to this day_. Again,
when David, displeased, that the Lord had slain Uzzah, for putting out
his hand to sustain the ark, called the place Perez-Uzzah, the writer
saith, (_2 Sam._ vi. 8) it is called so _to this day_: the time
therefore of the writing of that book, must be long after the time of
the fact; that is, long after the time of David.

[Sidenote: The books of the Kings, and the Chronicles.]

As for the two books of the _Kings_, and the two books of the
_Chronicles_, besides the places which mention such monuments, as the
writer saith, remained till his own days; such as are _1 Kings_ ix. 13,
ix. 21, x. 12, xii. 19. _2 Kings_ ii. 22, viii. 22, x. 27, xiv. 7, xvi.
6, xvii. 23, xvii. 34, xvii. 41, and _1 Chron._ iv. 41, v. 26: it is
argument sufficient they were written after the captivity in Babylon,
that the history of them is continued till that time. For the facts
registered are always more ancient than the register; and much more
ancient than such books as make mention of, and quote the register; as
these books do in divers places, referring the reader to the Chronicles
of the Kings of Judah, to the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel, to the
Books of the prophet Samuel, of the prophet Nathan, of the prophet
Ahijah; to the Vision of Jehdo, to the books of the prophet Serveiah,
and of the prophet Addo.

[Sidenote: Ezra and Nehemiah.]

The books of _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_ were written certainly after their
return from captivity; because their return, the re-edification of the
walls and houses of Jerusalem, the renovation of the covenant, and
ordination of their policy, are therein contained.

[Sidenote: Esther.]

The history of _Queen Esther_ is of the time of the captivity; and
therefore the writer must have been of the same time, or after it.

[Sidenote: Job.]

The book of _Job_ hath no mark in it of the time wherein it was written;
and though it appear sufficiently (_Ezekiel_ xiv. 14, and _James_ v. 11)
that he was no feigned person; yet the book itself seemeth not to be a
history, but a treatise concerning a question in ancient time much
disputed, _why wicked men have often prospered in this world, and good
men have been afflicted_; and this is the more probable, because from
the beginning, to the third verse of the third chapter, where the
complaint of Job beginneth, the Hebrew is, as St. Jerome testifies, in
prose; and from thence to the sixth verse of the last chapter, in
hexameter verses; and the rest of that chapter again in prose. So that
the dispute is all in verse; and the prose is added, but as a preface in
the beginning, and an epilogue in the end. But verse is no usual style
of such, as either are themselves in great pain, as Job; or of such as
come to comfort them, as his friends; but in philosophy, especially
moral philosophy, in ancient time frequent.

[Sidenote: The Psalter.]

The _Psalms_ were written the most part by David, for the use of the
quire. To these are added some songs of Moses, and other holy men; and
some of them after the return from the captivity, as the 137th and the
126th, whereby it is manifest that the Psalter was compiled, and put
into the form it now hath, after the return of the Jews from Babylon.

[Sidenote: The Proverbs.]

The _Proverbs_, being a collection of wise and godly sayings, partly of
Solomon, partly of Agur, the son of Jakeh, and partly of the mother of
king Lemuel, cannot probably be thought to have been collected by
Solomon, rather than by Agur, or the mother of Lemuel; and that, though
the sentences be theirs, yet the collection or compiling them into this
one book, was the work of some other godly man, that lived after them
all.

[Sidenote: Ecclesiastes and the Canticles.]

The books of _Ecclesiastes_ and the _Canticles_ have nothing that was
not Solomon’s, except it be the titles, or inscriptions. For _The Words
of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem_; and, _The Song of
Songs_, which is Solomon’s, seem to have been made for distinction’s
sake, then, when the Books of Scripture were gathered into one body of
the law; to the end, that not the doctrine only, but the authors also
might be extant.

[Sidenote: Prophets.]

Of the prophets, the most ancient, are Zephaniah, Jonah, Amos, Hosea,
Isaiah, and Michah, who lived in the time of Amaziah and Azariah,
otherwise Ozias, kings of Judah. But the book of Jonah is not properly a
register of his prophecy; for that is contained in these few words,
_Forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed_; but a history or narration
of his frowardness and disputing God’s commandments; so that there is
small probability he should be the author, seeing he is the subject of
it. But the book of _Amos_ is his prophecy.

Jeremiah, Obadiah, Nahum, and Habakkuk prophecied in the time of Josiah.

Ezekiel, Daniel, Haggai, and Zechariah, in the captivity.

When Joel and Malachi prophecied, is not evident by their writings. But
considering the inscriptions, or titles of their books, it is manifest
enough, that the whole Scripture of the Old Testament, was set forth in
the form we have it, after the return of the Jews from their captivity
in Babylon, and before the time of Ptolomæus Philadelphus, that caused
it to be translated into Greek by seventy men, which were sent him out
of Judea for that purpose. And if the books of Apocrypha, which are
recommended to us by the church, though not for canonical, yet for
profitable books for our instruction, may in this point be credited, the
Scripture was set forth in the form we have it in, by Esdras: as may
appear by that which he himself saith, in the second book, (chapter xiv.
verse 21, 22, &c.) where speaking to God, he saith thus, _Thy law is
burnt; therefore no man knoweth the things which thou hast done, or the
works that are to begin. But if I have found grace before thee, send
down the holy spirit into me, and I shall write all that hath been done
in the world, since the beginning, which were written in thy law, that
men may find thy path, and that they which will live in the latter day,
may live._ And verse 45: _And it came to pass when the forty days were
fulfilled, that the highest spake, saying, The first that thou hast
written, publish openly, that the worthy and unworthy may read it; but
keep the seventy last, that thou mayest deliver them only to such as be
wise among the people_. And thus much concerning the time of the writing
of the books of the Old Testament.

[Sidenote: The New Testament.]

The writers of the New Testament lived all in less than an age after
Christ’s ascension, and had all of them seen our Saviour, or been his
disciples, except St. Paul, and St. Luke; and consequently whatsoever
was written by them, is as ancient as the time of the apostles. But the
time wherein the books of the New Testament were received, and
acknowledged by the church to be of their writing, is not altogether so
ancient. For, as the books of the Old Testament are derived to us, from
no other time than that of Esdras, who by the direction of God’s spirit
retrieved them, when they were lost: those of the New Testament, of
which the copies were not many, nor could easily be all in any one
private man’s hand, cannot be derived from a higher time, than that
wherein the governors of the church collected, approved, and recommended
them to us, as the writings of those apostles and disciples, under whose
names they go. The first enumeration of all the books, both of the Old
and New Testament, is in the canons of the apostles, supposed to be
collected by Clement, the first (after St. Peter) bishop of Rome. But
because that is but supposed, and by many questioned, the Council of
Laodicea is the first we know, that recommended the Bible to the then
Christian churches, for the writings of the prophets and apostles: and
this Council was held in the 364th year after Christ. At which time,
though ambition had so far prevailed on the great doctors of the church,
as no more to esteem emperors, though Christian, for the shepherds of
the people, but for sheep; and emperors not Christian, for wolves; and
endeavoured to pass their doctrine, not for counsel and information, as
preachers; but for laws, as absolute governors; and thought such frauds
as tended to make the people the more obedient to Christian doctrine, to
be pious; yet I am persuaded they did not therefore falsify the
Scriptures, though the copies of the books of the New Testament, were in
the hands only of the ecclesiastics; because if they had had an
intention so to do, they would surely have made them more favourable to
their power over Christian princes, and civil sovereignty, than they
are. I see not therefore any reason to doubt but that the Old and New
Testament, as we have them now, are the true registers of those things,
which were done and said by the prophets and apostles. And so perhaps
are some of those books which are called apocrypha, and left out of the
canon, not for inconformity of doctrine with the rest, but only because
they are not found in the Hebrew. For after the conquest of Asia by
Alexander the Great, there were few learned Jews, that were not perfect
in the Greek tongue. For the seventy interpreters that converted the
Bible into Greek, were all of them Hebrews; and we have extant the works
of Philo and Josephus, both Jews, written by them eloquently in Greek.
[Sidenote: Their scope.] But it is not the writer, but the authority of
the church, that maketh the book canonical. And although these books
were written by divers men, yet it is manifest the writers were all
indued with one and the same spirit, in that they conspire to one and
the same end, which is setting forth of the rights of the kingdom of
God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For the book of _Genesis_,
deriveth the genealogy of God’s people, from the creation of the world,
to the going into Egypt: the other four books of Moses contain the
election of God for their king, and the laws which he prescribed for
their government: the books of _Joshua_, _Judges_, _Ruth_, and _Samuel_,
to the time of Saul, describe the acts of God’s people, till the time
they cast off God’s yoke, and called for a king, after the manner of
their neighbour nations. The rest of the history of the Old Testament
derives the succession of the line of David, to the captivity, out of
which line was to spring the restorer of the kingdom of God, even our
blessed Saviour God the Son, whose coming was foretold in the books of
the prophets, after whom the Evangelists write his life, and actions,
and his claim to the kingdom, whilst he lived on earth: and lastly, the
_Acts_, and _Epistles_ of the Apostles, declare the coming of God the
Holy Ghost, and the authority he left with them and their successors,
for the direction of the Jews, and for the invitation of the Gentiles.
In sum, the histories and the prophecies of the Old Testament, and the
gospels and epistles of the New Testament, have had one and the same
scope, to convert men to the obedience of God; I., in Moses, and the
Priests; II., in the man Christ; and III., in the Apostles and the
successors to apostolical power. For these three at several times did
represent the person of God: Moses, and his successors the High Priests,
and Kings of Judah, in the Old Testament: Christ himself, in the time he
lived on earth: and the Apostles, and their successors, from the day of
Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost descended on them, to this day.

[Sidenote: The question of the authority of the Scriptures stated.]

It is a question much disputed between the divers sects of Christian
religion, _from whence the Scriptures derive their authority_; which
question is also propounded sometimes in other terms, as, _how we know
them to be the word of God_, or, _why we believe them to be so_: and the
difficulty of resolving it, ariseth chiefly from the improperness of the
words wherein the question itself is couched. For it is believed on all
hands, that the first and original _author_ of them is God; and
consequently the question disputed, is not that. Again, it is manifest,
that none can know they are God’s word, (though all true Christians
believe it,) but those to whom God himself hath revealed it
supernaturally; and therefore the question is not rightly moved, of our
_knowledge_ of it. Lastly, when the question is propounded of our
_belief_; because some are moved to believe for one, and others for
other reasons; there can be rendered no one general answer for them all.
The question truly stated is, _by what authority they are made law_.

[Sidenote: Their authority and interpretation.]

As far as they differ not from the laws of nature, there is no doubt,
but they are the law of God, and carry their authority with them,
legible to all men that have the use of natural reason: but this is no
other authority, than that of all other moral doctrine consonant to
reason; the dictates whereof are laws, not _made_, but _eternal_.

If they be made law by God himself, they are of the nature of written
law, which are laws to them only to whom God hath so sufficiently
published them, as no man can excuse himself, by saying, he knew not
they were his.

He therefore to whom God hath not supernaturally revealed that they are
his, nor that those that published them, were sent by him, is not
obliged to obey them, by any authority, but his, whose commands have
already the force of laws; that is to say, by any other authority, than
that of the commonwealth, residing in the sovereign, who only has the
legislative power. Again, if it be not the legislative authority of the
commonwealth, that giveth them the force of laws, it must be some other
authority derived from God, either private, or public: if private, it
obliges only him, to whom in particular God hath been pleased to reveal
it. For if every man should be obliged, to take for God’s law, what
particular men, on pretence of private inspiration, or revelation,
should obtrude upon him, in such a number of men, that out of pride and
ignorance, take their own dreams, and extravagant fancies, and madness,
for testimonies of God’s spirit; or out of ambition, pretend to such
divine testimonies, falsely, and contrary to their own consciences, it
were impossible that any divine law should be acknowledged. If public,
it is the authority of the _commonwealth_, or of the _church_. But the
church, if it be one person, is the same thing with a commonwealth of
Christians; called a _commonwealth_, because it consisteth of men united
in one person, their sovereign; and a _church_, because it consisteth in
Christian men, united in one Christian sovereign. But if the church be
not one person, then it hath no authority at all: it can neither
command, nor do any action at all; nor is capable of having any power,
or right to anything: nor has any will, reason nor voice; for all these
qualities are personal. Now if the whole number of Christians be not
contained in one commonwealth, they are not one person; nor is there an
universal church that hath any authority over them; and therefore the
Scriptures are not made laws, by the universal church: or if it be one
commonwealth, then all Christian monarchs and states are private
persons, and subject to be judged, deposed, and punished by an universal
sovereign of all Christendom. So that the question of the authority of
the Scriptures, is reduced to this, _whether Christian kings, and the
sovereign assemblies in Christian commonwealths, be absolute in their
own territories, immediately under God; or subject to one vicar of
Christ, constituted of the universal church; to be judged, condemned,
deposed, and put to death, as he shall think expedient, or necessary for
the common good_.

Which question cannot be resolved, without a more particular
consideration of the Kingdom of God; from whence also, we are to judge
of the authority of interpreting the Scripture. For, whosoever hath a
lawful power over any writing, to make it law, hath the power also to
approve, or disapprove the interpretation of the same.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXXIV.

                 OF THE SIGNIFICATION OF SPIRIT, ANGEL,
                    AND INSPIRATION IN THE BOOKS OF
                            HOLY SCRIPTURE.


[Sidenote: Body and spirit how taken in the Scripture.]

Seeing the foundation of all true ratiocination, is the constant
signification of words; which in the doctrine following, dependeth not,
as in natural science, on the will of the writer, nor, as in common
conversation, on vulgar use, but on the sense they carry in the
Scripture; it is necessary, before I proceed any further, to determine,
out of the Bible, the meaning of such words, as by their ambiguity, may
render what I am to infer upon them, obscure, or disputable. I will
begin with the words BODY and SPIRIT, which in the language of the
Schools are termed, _substances_, _corporeal_, and _incorporeal_.

[Sidenote: Body and spirit how taken in the Scripture.]

The word _body_, in the most general acceptation, signifieth that which
filleth, or occupieth some certain room, or imagined place; and
dependeth not on the imagination, but is a real part of that we call the
_universe_. For the _universe_, being the aggregate of all bodies, there
is no real part thereof that is not also _body_; nor any thing properly
a _body_, that is not also part of that aggregate of all _bodies_, the
_universe_. The same also, because bodies are subject to change, that is
to say, to variety of apparence to the sense of living creatures, is
called _substance_, that is to say, _subject_ to various accidents: as
sometimes to be moved; sometimes to stand still; and to seem to our
senses sometimes hot, sometimes cold, sometimes of one colour, smell,
taste, or sound, sometimes of another. And this diversity of seeming,
produced by the diversity of the operation of bodies on the organs of
our sense, we attribute to alterations of the bodies that operate, and
call them _accidents_ of those bodies. And according to this acceptation
of the word, _substance_ and _body_ signify the same thing; and
therefore _substance incorporeal_ are words, which when they are joined
together, destroy one another, as if a man should say, an _incorporeal
body_.

But in the sense of common people, not all the universe is called body,
but only such parts thereof as they can discern by the sense of feeling,
to resist their force, or by the sense of their eyes, to hinder them
from a farther prospect. Therefore in the common language of men, _air_,
and _aerial substances_, use not to be taken for _bodies_, but (as often
as men are sensible of their effects) are called _wind_, or _breath_, or
(because the same are called in the Latin _spiritus_) _spirits_; as when
they call that aerial substance, which in the body of any living
creature gives it life and motion, _vital_ and _animal spirits_. But for
those idols of the brain, which represent bodies to us, where they are
not, as in a looking-glass, in a dream, or to a distempered brain
waking, they are, as the apostle saith generally of all idols, nothing;
nothing at all, I say, there where they seem to be; and in the brain
itself, nothing but tumult, proceeding either from the action of the
objects, or from the disorderly agitation of the organs of our sense.
And men, that are otherwise employed, than to search into their causes,
know not of themselves, what to call them; and may therefore easily be
persuaded, by those whose knowledge they much reverence, some to call
them _bodies_, and think them made of air compacted by a power
supernatural, because the sight judges them corporeal; and some to call
them _spirits_, because the sense of touch discerneth nothing in the
place where they appear, to resist their fingers: so that the proper
signification of _spirit_ in common speech, is either a subtle, fluid,
and invisible body, or a ghost, or other idol or phantasm of the
imagination. But for metaphorical significations, there be many: for
sometimes it is taken for disposition or inclination of the mind; as
when for the disposition to controul the sayings of other men, we say,
_a spirit of contradiction_; for _a disposition to uncleanness_, _an
unclean spirit_; for _perverseness_, _a froward spirit_; for
_sullenness_, _a dumb spirit_; and for _inclination to godliness and
God’s service_, _the Spirit of God_: sometimes for any eminent ability
or extraordinary passion, or disease of the mind, as when _great wisdom_
is called _the spirit of wisdom_; and _madmen_ are said to be _possessed
with a spirit_.

Other signification of _spirit_ I find nowhere any; and where none of
these can satisfy the sense of that word in Scripture, the place falleth
not under human understanding; and our faith therein consisteth not in
our opinion, but in our submission; as in all places where God is said
to be a _Spirit_; or where by the _Spirit of God_, is meant God himself.
For the nature of God is incomprehensible; that is to say, we understand
nothing of _what he is_, but only _that he is_; and therefore the
attributes we give him, are not to tell one another, _what he is_, nor
to signify our opinion of his nature, but our desire to honour him with
such names as we conceive most honourable amongst ourselves.

[Sidenote: The spirit of God taken in the Scripture sometimes for a
           wind, or breath.]

_Gen._ i. 2. _The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters._ Here
if by the _Spirit of God_ be meant God himself, then is _motion_
attributed to God, and consequently _place_, which are intelligible only
of bodies, and not of substances incorporeal; and so the place is above
our understanding, that can conceive nothing moved that changes not
place, or that has not dimension; and whatsoever has dimension, is body.
But the meaning of those words is best understood by the like place,
(_Gen._ viii. 1.) where when the earth was covered with waters, as in
the beginning, God intending to abate them, and again to discover the
dry land, useth the like words, _I will bring my Spirit upon the earth,
and the waters shall be diminished_: in which place, by _Spirit_ is
understood a wind, that is an air or _spirit moved_, which might be
called, as in the former place, the _Spirit of God_, because it was
God’s work.

[Sidenote: Secondly, for extraordinary gifts of the understanding.]

Gen. xli. 38, Pharoah calleth the Wisdom of Joseph, the _Spirit of God_.
For Joseph having advised him to look out a wise and discreet man, and
to set him over the land of Egypt, he saith thus, _Can we find such a
man as this is, in whom is the Spirit of God?_ And _Exod._ xxviii. 3,
_Thou shalt speak_, saith God, _to all the wise hearted, whom I have
filled with the spirit of wisdom, to make Aaron garments, to consecrate
him_: where extraordinary understanding, though but in making garments,
as being the _gift_ of God, is called the _Spirit of God_. The same is
found again, _Exod._ xxxi. 3, 4, 5, 6, _and_ xxxv. 31. And _Isaiah_ xi.
2, 3, where the prophet speaking of the Messiah, saith, _the Spirit of
the Lord shall abide upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding,
the spirit of counsel and fortitude, and the spirit of the fear of the
Lord_. Where manifestly is meant, not so many ghosts, but so many
eminent graces that God would give him.

[Sidenote: Thirdly, for extraordinary affections.]

In the book of _Judges_, an extraordinary zeal and courage in the
defence of God’s people, is called the _Spirit_ of God; as when it
excited Othniel, Gideon, Jephtha, and Sampson to deliver them from
servitude, _Judges_, iii. 10, vi. 34, xi. 29, xiii. 25, xiv. 6, 19. And
of Saul, upon the news of the insolence of the Ammonites towards the men
of Jabesh Gilead, it is said, (_1 Sam._ xi. 6) that _the Spirit of God
came upon Saul, and his anger_, (or, as it is in the Latin, _his fury_),
_was kindled greatly_. Where it is not probable was meant a ghost, but
an extraordinary _zeal_ to punish the cruelty of the Ammonites. In like
manner by the _Spirit_ of God, that came upon Saul, when he was amongst
the prophets that praised God in songs and music, (_1 Sam._ xix. 23), is
to be understood, not a ghost, but an unexpected and sudden _zeal_ to
join with them in their devotion.

[Sidenote: Fourthly, for the gift of prediction by dreams and visions.]

The false prophet Zedekiah saith to Micaiah (_1 Kings_ xxii. 24), _which
way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak to thee?_ Which can not
be understood of a ghost; for Micaiah declared before the kings of
Israel and Judah, the event of the battle, as from a _vision_, and not
as from a _spirit_ speaking in him.

In the same manner it appeareth in the books of the Prophets, that
though they spake by the _spirit_ of God, that is to say, by a special
grace of prediction; yet their knowledge of the future, was not by a
ghost within them, but by some supernatural _dream_ or _vision_.

[Sidenote: Fifthly, for life.]

_Gen._ ii. 7, it is said, _God made man of the dust of the earth, and
breathed into his nostrils_ (spiraculum vitæ) _the breath of life, and
man was made a living soul_. There the _breath of life_ inspired by God,
signifies no more, but that God gave him life; and (_Job_ xxvii. 3) _as
long as the Spirit of God is in my nostrils_, is no more than to say,
_as long as I live_. So in _Ezek._ i. 20, _the spirit of life was in the
wheels_, is equivalent to, _the wheels were alive_. And, (_Ezek._ ii. 2)
_the Spirit entered into me, and set me on my feet_, that is, _I
recovered my vital strength_; not that any ghost or incorporeal
substance entered into, and possessed his body.

[Sidenote: Sixthly, for a subordination to authority.]

In the xith chap. of _Numbers_, v. 17, _I will take_, saith God, _of the
Spirit, which is upon thee, and will put it upon them, and they shall
bear the burthen of the people with thee_; that is, upon the seventy
elders: whereupon two of the seventy are said to prophecy in the camp;
of whom some complained, and Joshua desired Moses to forbid them; which
Moses would not do. Whereby it appears, that Joshua knew not that they
had received authority so to do, and prophecied according to the mind of
Moses, that is to say, by a _spirit_, or _authority_ subordinate to his
own.

In the like sense we read, (_Deut._ xxxiv. 9) that _Joshua was full of
the spirit of wisdom, because Moses had laid his hands upon him_: that
is because he was _ordained_ by Moses, to prosecute the work he had
himself begun, namely the bringing of God’s people into the promised
land, but prevented by death, could not finish.

In the like sense it is said, (_Rom._ viii. 9) _If any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his_: not meaning thereby the _ghost_ of
Christ, but a _submission_ to his doctrine. As also, (_1 John_ iv. 2)
_Hereby you shall know the Spirit of God; every spirit that confesseth
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God_; by which is meant
the spirit of unfeigned Christianity, or _submission_ to that main
article of Christian faith, that Jesus is the Christ; which cannot be
interpreted of a ghost.

Likewise these words, (_Luke_ iv. 1) _And Jesus full of the Holy Ghost_,
(that is, as it is expressed, _Matt._ iv. 1, and _Mark_ i. 12, _of the
Holy Spirit_,) may be understood, for _zeal_ to do the work for which he
was sent by God the Father: but to interpret it of a ghost, is to say,
that God himself, for so our Saviour was, was filled with God; which is
very improper and insignificant. How we came to translate _spirits_, by
the word _ghosts_, which signifieth nothing, neither in heaven, nor
earth, but the imaginary inhabitants of man’s brain, I examine not: but
this I say, the word _spirit_ in the text signifieth no such thing; but
either properly a real _substance_, or metaphorically, some
extraordinary _ability_ or _affection_ of the mind, or of the body.

[Sidenote: Seventhly, for aerial bodies.]

The disciples of Christ, seeing him walking upon the sea, (_Matt._ xiv.
26, and _Mark_ vi. 49) supposed him to be a _Spirit_, meaning thereby an
aerial _body_, and not a phantasm; for it is said, they all saw him;
which cannot be understood of the delusions of the brain, (which are not
common to many at once, as visible bodies are; but singular, because of
the differences of fancies,) but of bodies only. In like manner, where
he was taken for a _spirit_, by the same apostles, (_Luke_ xxiv. 37): so
also (_Acts_ xii. 15) when St. Peter was delivered out of prison, it
would not be believed; but when the maid said he was at the door, they
said it was his _angel_; by which must be meant a corporeal substance,
or we must say, the disciples themselves did follow the common opinion
of both Jews and Gentiles, that some such apparitions were not
imaginary, but real, and such as needed not the fancy of man for their
existence. These the Jews called _spirits_, and _angels_, good or bad;
as the Greeks called the same by the name of _demons_. And some such
apparitions may be real, and substantial; that is to say, subtle bodies,
which God can form by the same power, by which he formed all things, and
make use of, as of ministers, and messengers, that is to say, angels, to
declare his will, and execute the same when he pleaseth, in
extraordinary and supernatural manner. But when he hath so formed them,
they are substances, endued with dimensions, and take up room, and can
be moved from place to place, which is peculiar to bodies; and therefore
are not ghosts _incorporeal_, that is to say, ghosts that are in _no
place_; that is to say, that are _no where_; that is to say, that
seeming to be _somewhat_, are _nothing_. But if corporeal be taken in
the most vulgar manner, for such substances as are perceptible by our
external senses; then is substance incorporeal, a thing not imaginary,
but real; namely, a thin substance invisible, but that hath the same
dimensions that are in grosser bodies.

[Sidenote: Angel, what.]

By the name of ANGEL, is signified generally, a _messenger_; and most
often, a _messenger of God_; and by a messenger of God, is signified,
any thing that makes known his extraordinary presence; that is to say,
the extraordinary manifestation of his power, especially by a dream or
vision.

Concerning the creation of _angels_, there is nothing delivered in the
Scriptures. That they are spirits, is often repeated: but by the name of
spirit, is signified both in Scripture, and vulgarly, both amongst Jews
and Gentiles, sometimes thin bodies: as the air, the wind, the spirits
vital and animal of living creatures; and sometimes the images that rise
in the fancy in dreams and visions; which are not real substances, nor
last any longer than the dream, or vision they appear in; which
apparitions, though no real substances, but accidents of the brain; yet
when God raiseth them supernaturally, to signify his will, they are not
improperly termed God’s messengers, that is to say, his _angels_.

And as the Gentiles did vulgarly conceive the imagery of the brain, for
things really subsistent without them, and not dependent on the fancy;
and out of them framed their opinions of _demons_, good and evil; which
because they seemed to subsist really, they called _substances_; and,
because they could not feel them with their hands, _incorporeal_: so
also the Jews, upon the same ground, without any thing in the Old
Testament that constrained them thereunto, had generally an opinion,
except the sect of the Sadducees, that those apparitions, which it
pleased God sometimes to produce in the fancy of men, for his own
service, and therefore called them his _angels_, were substances, not
dependent on the fancy, but permanent creatures of God; whereof those
which they thought were good to them, they esteemed the _angels of God_,
and those they thought would hurt them, they called _evil angels_, or
evil spirits; such as was the spirit of Python, and the spirits of
madmen, of lunatics and epileptics: for they esteemed such as were
troubled with such diseases, _demoniacs_.

But if we consider the places of the Old Testament where angels are
mentioned, we shall find, that in most of them, there can nothing else
be understood by the word _angel_, but some image raised,
supernaturally, in the fancy, to signify the presence of God in the
execution of some supernatural work; and therefore in the rest, where
their nature is not expressed, it may be understood in the same manner.

For we read, (_Gen._ xvi.) that the same apparition is called, not only
an _angel_, but _God_; where that which (verse 7) is called the _angel_
of the Lord, in the tenth verse, saith to Agar, _I will multiply thy
seed exceedingly_; that is, speaketh in the person of God. Neither was
this apparition a fancy figured, but a voice. By which it is manifest,
that _angel_ signifieth there, nothing but _God_ himself, that caused
Agar supernaturally to apprehend a voice from heaven; or rather, nothing
else but a voice supernatural, testifying God’s special presence there.
Why therefore may not the angels that appeared to Lot, and are called
(_Gen._ xix. 12) _men_; and to whom, though they were two, Lot speaketh
(verse 18) as but to one, and that one, as God, (for the words are, _Lot
said unto them, Oh not so my Lord_), be understood of images of men,
supernaturally formed in the fancy; as well as before by angel was
understood a fancied voice? When the angel called to Abraham out of
heaven, to stay his hand (_Gen._ xxii. 11) from slaying Isaac, there was
no apparition, but a voice; which nevertheless was called properly
enough a messenger or _angel_ of God, because it declared God’s will
supernaturally, and saves the labour of supposing any permanent ghosts.
The angels which Jacob saw on the ladder of Heaven, (_Gen._ xxviii. 12)
were a vision of his sleep; therefore only fancy, and a dream; yet being
supernatural, and signs of God’s special presence, those apparitions are
not improperly called _angels_. The same is to be understood, (_Gen._
xxxi. 11) where Jacob saith thus, _The Angel of the Lord appeared to me
in my sleep_. For an apparition made to a man in his sleep, is that
which all men call a dream, whether such dream be natural, or
supernatural: and that which there Jacob calleth an _angel_, was God
himself; for the same angel saith, verse 13, _I am the God of Bethel_.

Also (_Exod._ xiv. 19) the angel that went before the army of Israel to
the Red Sea, and then came behind it, is, (verse 24) the Lord himself;
and he appeared, not in the form of a beautiful man, but in form,
(_Exod._ xiii. 21) by day, of a _pillar of cloud_, and, by night, in
form of a _pillar of fire_; and yet this pillar was all the apparition
and _angel_ promised to Moses, (_Exod._ xxxiii. 2) for the army’s guide:
for this cloudy pillar (_Exod._ xxxiii. 9) is said to have descended,
and stood at the door of the Tabernacle, and to have talked with Moses.

There you see motion and speech, which are commonly attributed to
angels, attributed to a cloud, because the cloud served as a sign of
God’s presence; and was no less an angel, than if it had had the form of
a man, or child of never so great beauty; or wings, as usually they are
painted, for the false instruction of common people. For it is not the
shape; but their use that makes them angels. But their use is to be
significations of God’s presence in supernatural operations; as when
Moses (_Exod._ xxxiii. 14) had desired God to go along with the camp, as
he had done always before the making of the golden calf, God did not
answer, _I will go_, nor, _I will send an angel in my stead_; but thus,
_My presence shall go with thee_.

To mention all the places of the Old Testament where the name of angel
is found, would be too long. Therefore to comprehend them all at once, I
say, there is no text in that part of the Old Testament, which the
Church of England holdeth for canonical, from which we can conclude,
there is, or hath been created, any permanent thing, understood by the
name of _spirit_ or _angel_, that hath not quantity; and that may not be
by the understanding divided; that is to say, considered by parts; so as
one part may be in one place, and the next part in the next place to it;
and, in sum, which is not (taking body for that, which is somewhat or
some where,) corporeal; but in every place, the sense will bear the
interpretation of angel, for messenger; as John Baptist is called an
angel, and Christ the Angel of the Covenant; and as, according to the
same analogy, the dove and the fiery tongues, in that they were signs of
God’s special presence, might also be called angels. Though we find in
_Daniel_ two names of angels, Gabriel and Michael; yet it is clear out
of the text itself, (_Dan._ xii. 1) that by Michael is meant Christ, not
as an angel, but as a prince: and that Gabriel, as the like apparitions
made to other holy men in their sleep, was nothing but a supernatural
phantasm, by which it seemed to Daniel, in his dream, that two saints
being in talk, one of them said to the other, _Gabriel, Let us make this
man understand his vision_: for God needeth not to distinguish his
celestial servants by names, which are useful only to the short memories
of mortals. Nor in the New Testament is there any place, out of which it
can be proved, that angels, except when they are put for such men as God
hath made the messengers and ministers of his word or works, are things
permanent, and withal incorporeal. That they are permanent, may be
gathered from the words of our Saviour himself, (_Matt._ xxv. 41) where
he saith, it shall be said to the wicked in the last day, _Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels_: which
place is manifest for the permanence of evil angels, (unless we might
think the name of Devil and his angels may be understood of the Church’s
adversaries and their ministers); but then it is repugnant to their
immateriality; because everlasting fire is no punishment to impatible
substances, such as are all things incorporeal. Angels therefore are not
thence proved to be incorporeal. In like manner where St. Paul says, (_1
Cor._ vi. 3) _Know ye not that we shall judge the angels?_ and _2 Pet._
ii. 4, _For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down
into hell_: and (_Jude_ i. 6) _And the angels that kept not their first
estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness unto the judgment of the last day_: though it
prove the permanence of angelical nature, it confirmeth also their
materiality. And (_Matt._ xxii. 30) _In the resurrection men do neither
marry nor give in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven_: but
in the resurrection men shall be permanent, and not incorporeal; so
therefore also are the angels.

There be divers other places out of which may be drawn the like
conclusion. To men that understand the signification of these words,
_substance_, and _incorporeal_; as _incorporeal_ is taken, not for
subtle body, but for _not body_; they imply a contradiction: insomuch as
to say, an angel or spirit is in that sense an incorporeal substance, is
to say in effect, there is no angel nor spirit at all. Considering
therefore the signification of the word _angel_ in the Old Testament,
and the nature of dreams and visions that happen to men by the ordinary
way of nature; I was inclined to this opinion, that angels were nothing
but supernatural apparitions of the fancy, raised by the special and
extraordinary operation of God, thereby to make his presence and
commandments known to mankind, and chiefly to his own people. But the
many places of the New Testament, and our Saviour’s own words, and in
such texts, wherein is no suspicion of corruption of the Scripture, have
extorted from my feeble reason, an acknowledgment and belief, that there
be also angels substantial, and permanent. But to believe they be in no
place, that is to say, no where, that is to say, nothing, as they,
though indirectly, say, that will have them incorporeal, cannot by
Scripture be evinced.

[Sidenote: Inspiration, what.]

On the signification of the word _spirit_, dependeth that of the word
INSPIRATION; which must either be taken properly; and then it is nothing
but the blowing into a man some thin and subtle air or wind, in such
manner as a man filleth a bladder with his breath; or if spirits be not
corporeal, but have their existence only in the fancy, it is nothing but
the blowing in of a phantasm; which is improper to say, and impossible;
for phantasms are not, but only seem to be, somewhat. That word
therefore is used in the Scripture metaphorically only: as (_Gen._ ii.
7) where it is said that God _inspired_ into man the breath of life, no
more is meant, than that God gave unto him vital motion. For we are not
to think that God made first a living breath and then blew it into Adam
after he was made, whether that breath were real, or seeming; but only
as it is, (_Acts_ xvii. 25) _that he gave him life, and breath_; that
is, made him a living creature. And where it is said, (_2 Tim._ iii. 16)
_all Scripture is given by inspiration from God_, speaking there of the
Scripture of the Old Testament, it is an easy metaphor, to signify, that
God inclined the spirit or mind of those writers, to write that which
should be useful, in teaching, reproving, correcting, and instructing
men in the way of righteous living. But where St. Peter, (_2 Pet._ i.
21) saith, that _Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but
the holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Spirit_, by the
Holy Spirit is meant the voice of God in a dream or vision supernatural,
which is not _inspiration_. Nor, when our Saviour breathing on his
disciples, said, _Receive the Holy Spirit_, was that breath the Spirit,
but a sign of the spiritual graces he gave unto them. And though it be
said of many, and of our Saviour himself, that he was full of the Holy
Spirit; yet that fulness is not to be understood for _infusion_ of the
substance of God, but for accumulation of his gifts, such as are the
gift of sanctity of life, of tongues, and the like, whether attained
supernaturally, or by study and industry; for in all cases they are the
gifts of God. So likewise where God says (_Joel_ ii. 28) _I will pour
out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see
visions_, we are not to understand it in the proper sense, as if his
_Spirit_ were like water, subject to effusion or infusion; but as if God
had promised to give them prophetical dreams, and visions. For the
proper use of the word _infused_, in speaking of the graces of God, is
an abuse of it; for those graces are virtues, not bodies to be carried
hither and thither, and to be poured into men as into barrels.

In the same manner, to take _inspiration_ in the proper sense, or to say
that good _spirits_ entered into men to make them prophecy, or evil
_spirits_ into those that became phrenetic, lunatic, or epileptic, is
not to take the word in the sense of the Scripture; for the Spirit there
is taken for the power of God, working by causes to us unknown. As also
(_Acts_ ii. 2) the wind, that is there said to fill the house wherein
the apostles were assembled on the day of Pentecost, is not to be
understood for the _Holy Spirit_, which is the Deity itself; but for an
external sign of God’s special working on their hearts, to effect in
them the internal graces, and holy virtues he thought requisite for the
performance of their apostleship.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXXV.

                  OF THE SIGNIFICATION IN SCRIPTURE OF
                    KINGDOM OF GOD, OF HOLY, SACRED,
                             AND SACRAMENT.


[Sidenote: The kingdom of God taken by divines metaphorically, but in
           the Scriptures properly.]

The _Kingdom of God_ in the writings of divines, and specially in
sermons and treatises of devotion, is taken most commonly for eternal
felicity, after this life, in the highest heaven, which they also call
the kingdom of glory; and sometimes for the earnest of that felicity,
sanctification, which they term the kingdom of grace; but never for the
monarchy, that is to say, the sovereign power of God over any subjects
acquired by their own consent, which is the proper signification of
kingdom.

To the contrary, I find the KINGDOM OF GOD to signify, in most places of
Scripture, a _kingdom properly so named_, constituted by the votes of
the people of Israel in peculiar manner; wherein they chose God for
their king by covenant made with him, upon God’s promising them the
possession of the land of Canaan; and but seldom metaphorically; and
then it is taken for _dominion over sin_; (and only in the New
Testament;) because such a dominion as that, every subject shall have in
the kingdom of God, and without prejudice to the sovereign.

From the very creation, God not only reigned over all men _naturally_ by
his might; but also had _peculiar_ subjects, whom he commanded by a
voice, as one man speaketh to another. In which manner he _reigned_ over
Adam, and gave him commandment to abstain from the tree of cognizance of
good and evil; which when he obeyed not, but tasting thereof, took upon
him to be as God, judging between good and evil, not by his creator’s
commandment, but by his own sense, his punishment was a privation of the
estate of eternal life, wherein God had at first created him: and
afterwards God punished his posterity for their vices, all but eight
persons, with an universal deluge; and in these eight did consist the
then _kingdom of God_.

[Sidenote: The original of the kingdom of God.]

After this it pleased God to speak to Abraham, and (_Gen._ xvii. 7, 8)
to make a covenant with him in these words, _I will establish my
covenant between me, and thee, and thy seed after thee in their
generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God to thee, and to
thy seed after thee; and I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after
thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan for
an everlasting possession_. In this covenant _Abraham promiseth for
himself and his posterity, to obey as God, the Lord that spake to him;
and God on his part promiseth to Abraham the land of Canaan for an
everlasting possession_. And for a memorial, and a token of this
covenant, he ordaineth (_Gen._ xvii. 11) the _sacrament of
circumcision_. This is it which is called the _old covenant_ or
_testament_; and containeth a contract between God and Abraham; by which
Abraham obligeth himself, and his posterity, in a peculiar manner to be
subject to God’s positive law; for to the law moral he was obliged
before, as by an oath of allegiance. And though the name of _King_ be
not yet given to God, nor of _kingdom_ to Abraham and his seed: yet the
thing is the same; namely, an institution by pact, of God’s peculiar
sovereignty over the seed of Abraham; which in the renewing of the same
covenant by Moses, at Mount Sinai, is expressly called a peculiar
_kingdom of God_ over the Jews: and it is of Abraham, not of Moses, St.
Paul saith (_Rom._ iv. 11) that he is the _father of the faithful_; that
is, of those that are loyal, and do not violate their allegiance sworn
to God, then by circumcision, and afterwards in the _new covenant_ by
baptism.

[Sidenote: That the kingdom of God is properly his civil sovereignty
           over a peculiar people by pact.]

This covenant, at the foot of Mount Sinai, was renewed by Moses,
(_Exod._ xix. 5) where the Lord commandeth Moses to speak to the people
in this manner, _If you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant,
then ye shall be a peculiar people to me, for all the earth is mine; and
ye shall be unto me a sacerdotal kingdom, and an holy nation_. For a
_peculiar people_, the vulgar Latin hath _peculium de cunctis populis_:
the English translation, made in the beginning of the reign of King
James, hath a _peculiar treasure unto me above all nations_; and the
Geneva French, _the most precious jewel of all nations_. But the truest
translation is the first, because it is confirmed by St. Paul himself
(_Tit._ ii. 14) where he saith, alluding to that place, that our blessed
Saviour _gave himself for us, that he might purify us to himself, a
peculiar_, that is, an extraordinary, _people_: for the word is in the
Greek περιούσιος, which is opposed commonly to the word ἐπιούσιος: and
as this signifieth _ordinary_, _quotidian_, or, as in the Lord’s Prayer,
_of daily use_; so the other signifieth that which is _overplus_, and
_stored up_, and _enjoyed in a special manner_; which the Latins call
_peculium_: and this meaning of the place is confirmed by the reason God
rendereth of it, which followeth immediately, in that he addeth, _For
all the earth is mine_, as if he should say, _All the nations of the
world are mine_; but it is not so that you are mine, but in a _special
manner_: for they are all mine, by reason of my power; but you shall be
mine, by your own consent, and covenant; which is an addition to his
ordinary title, to all nations.

The same is again confirmed in express words in the same text, _Ye shall
be to me a sacerdotal kingdom, and an holy nation_. The vulgar Latin
hath it, _regnum sacerdotale_, to which agreeth the translation of that
place (_1 Pet._ ii. 9) _Sacerdotium regale_, _a regal priesthood_; as
also the institution itself, by which no man might enter into the
_Sanctum Sanctorum_, that is to say, no man might enquire God’s will
immediately of God himself, but only the high-priest. The English
translation before mentioned, following that of Geneva, has, _a kingdom
of priests_; which is either meant of the succession of one high-priest
after another, or else it accordeth not with St. Peter, nor with the
exercise of the high-priesthood: for there was never any but the
high-priest only, that was to inform the people of God’s will; nor any
convocation of priests ever allowed to enter into the _Sanctum
Sanctorum_.

Again, the title of a _holy nation_ confirms the same: for _holy_
signifies, that which is God’s by special, not by general right. All the
earth, as is said in the text, is God’s; but all the earth is not called
_holy_, but that only which is set apart for his especial service, as
was the nation of the Jews. It is therefore manifest enough by this one
place, that by the _kingdom of God_, is properly meant a commonwealth,
instituted, by the consent of those which were to be subject thereto,
for their civil government, and the regulating of their behaviour, not
only towards God their king, but also towards one another in point of
justice, and towards other nations both in peace and war; which properly
was a kingdom wherein God was king, and the high-priest was to be, after
the death of Moses, his sole viceroy or lieutenant.

But there be many other places that clearly prove the same. As first (_1
Samuel_, viii. 7) when the Elders of Israel, grieved with the corruption
of the sons of Samuel, demanded a king, Samuel displeased therewith,
prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord answering said unto him, _Hearken
unto the voice of the people, for they have not rejected thee, but they
have rejected me, that I should not reign over them_. Out of which it is
evident, that God himself was then their king; and Samuel did not
command the people, but only delivered to them that which God from time
to time appointed him.

Again, (_1 Sam._ xii. 12) where Samuel saith to the people, _When ye saw
that Nahash, king of the children of Ammon, came against you, ye said
unto me, Nay, but a king shall reign over us; when the Lord your God was
your king_. It is manifest that God was their king, and governed the
civil state of their commonwealth.

And after the Israelites had rejected God, the prophets did foretell his
restitution; as (_Isaiah_, xxiv. 23) _Then the moon shall be confounded,
and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Zion,
and in Jerusalem_; where he speaketh expressly of his reign in Zion and
Jerusalem; that is, on earth. And (_Micah_, iv. 7) _And the Lord shall
reign over them in Mount Zion_: this Mount Zion is in Jerusalem, upon
the earth. And (_Ezek._ xx. 33) _As I live, saith the Lord God, surely
with a mighty hand, and a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out, I
will rule over you_; and (verse 37) _I will cause you to pass under the
rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant_; that is, I
will reign over you, and make you to stand to that covenant which you
made with me by Moses, and brake in your rebellion against me in the
days of Samuel, and in your election of another king.

And in the New Testament, the angel Gabriel saith of our Saviour (_Luke_
i. 32, 33) _He shall be great, and be called the Son of the most High,
and the Lord shall give unto him the throne of his father David; and he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there
shall be no end_. This is also a kingdom upon earth; for the claim
whereof, as an enemy to Cæsar, he was put to death; the title of his
cross, was, _Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews_; he was crowned in
scorn with a crown of thorns; and for the proclaiming of him, it is said
of the disciples (_Acts_ xvii. 7) _That they did all of them contrary to
the decrees of Cæsar, saying there was another king, one Jesus_. The
kingdom therefore of God is a real, not a metaphorical kingdom; and so
taken, not only in the Old Testament, but in the New; when we say, _For
thine is the kingdom, the power, and glory_, it is to be understood of
God’s kingdom, by force of our covenant, not by the right of God’s
power; for such a kingdom God always hath; so that it were superfluous
to say in our prayer, _Thy kingdom come_, unless it be meant of the
restoration of that kingdom of God by Christ, which by revolt of the
Israelites had been interrupted in the election of Saul. Nor had it been
proper to say, _The kingdom of heaven is at hand_; or to pray, _Thy
kingdom come_, if it had still continued.

There be so many other places that confirm this interpretation, that it
were a wonder there is no greater notice taken of it, but that it gives
too much light to Christian kings to see their right of ecclesiastical
government. This they have observed, that instead of a _sacerdotal
kingdom_, translate, _a kingdom of priests_; for they may as well
translate a _royal priesthood_, as it is in St. Peter, into a
_priesthood of kings_. And whereas, for a _peculiar people_, they put a
_precious jewel_, or _treasure_, a man might as well call the special
regiment, or company of a general, the general’s precious jewel, or his
treasure.

In short, the kingdom of God is a civil kingdom; which consisted, first,
in the obligation of the people of Israel to those laws, which Moses
should bring unto them from Mount Sinai; and which afterwards the
high-priest for the time being, should deliver to them from before the
cherubims in the _sanctum sanctorum_; and which kingdom having been cast
off in the election of Saul, the prophets foretold, should be restored
by Christ; and the restoration whereof we daily pray for, when we say in
the Lord’s Prayer, _Thy kingdom come_; and the right whereof we
acknowledge, when we add, _For thine is the kingdom, the power, and
glory, for ever and ever, Amen_; and the proclaiming whereof, was the
preaching of the apostles; and to which men are prepared, by the
teachers of the Gospel; to embrace which Gospel, that is to say, to
promise obedience to God’s government, is to be in the _kingdom of
grace_, because God hath _gratis_ given to such the power to be the
subjects, that is children, of God hereafter, when Christ shall come in
majesty to judge the world, and actually to govern his own people, which
is called _the kingdom of glory_. If the kingdom of God, called also the
kingdom of heaven, from the gloriousness and admirable height of that
throne, were not a kingdom which God by his lieutenants, or vicars, who
deliver his commandments to the people, did exercise on earth; there
would not have been so much contention, and war, about who it is, by
whom God speaketh to us; neither would many priests have troubled
themselves with spiritual jurisdiction, nor any king have denied it
them.

[Sidenote: Holy, what.]

Out of this literal interpretation of the _kingdom of God_, ariseth also
the true interpretation of the word HOLY. For it is a word, which in
God’s kingdom answereth to that, which men in their kingdoms use to call
_public_, or the _king’s_.

The king of any country is the _public_ person, or representative of all
his own subjects. And God the king of Israel was the _Holy One_ of
Israel. The nation which is subject to one earthly sovereign, is the
nation of that sovereign, that is, of the public person. So the Jews,
who were God’s nation, were called (_Exod._ xix. 6) _a holy nation_. For
by _holy_, is always understood either God himself, or that which is
God’s in propriety; as by public is always meant, either the person of
the commonwealth itself, or something that is so the commonwealth’s, as
no private person can claim any propriety therein.

Therefore the Sabbath, God’s day, is a _holy day_; the temple, God’s
house, _a holy house_; sacrifices, tithes, and offerings, God’s tribute,
_holy duties_; priests, prophets, and anointed kings, under Christ,
God’s ministers, _holy men_; the celestial ministering spirits, God’s
messengers, _holy angels_; and the like: and wheresoever the word _holy_
is taken properly, there is still something signified of propriety,
gotten by consent. In saying, _Hallowed be thy name_, we do but pray to
God for grace to keep the first commandment, of _having no other Gods
but him_. Mankind is God’s nation in propriety: but the Jews only were a
_holy nation_. Why, but because they became his propriety by covenant?

[Sidenote: Sacred, what.]

And the word _profane_, is usually taken in the Scripture for the same
with _common_; and consequently their contraries, _holy_ and _proper_,
in the kingdom of God, must be the same also. But figuratively, those
men also are called _holy_, that led such godly lives, as if they had
forsaken all worldly designs, and wholly devoted and given themselves to
God. In the proper sense, that which is made _holy_ by God’s
appropriating or separating it to his own use, is said to be
_sanctified_ by God, as the seventh day in the fourth commandment; and
as the elect in the New Testament were said to be _sanctified_, when
they were endued with the spirit of godliness. And that which is made
_holy_ by the dedication of men, and given to God, so as to be used only
in his public service, is called also SACRED, and said to be
consecrated, as temples, and other houses of public prayer, and their
utensils, priests, and ministers, victims, offerings, and the external
matter of sacraments.

[Sidenote: Degrees of sanctity.]

Of _holiness_ there be degrees: for of those things that are set apart
for the service of God, there may be some set apart again, for a nearer
and more especial service. The whole nation of the Israelites were a
people holy to God; yet the tribe of Levi was amongst the Israelites a
holy tribe; and amongst the Levites, the priests were yet more holy; and
amongst the priests, the high-priest was the most holy. So the land of
Judea was the Holy Land; but the holy city wherein God was to be
worshipped, was more holy; and again the Temple more holy than the city,
and the _sanctum sanctorum_ more holy than the rest of the Temple.

[Sidenote: Sacrament.]

A SACRAMENT, is a separation of some visible thing from common use; and
a consecration of it to God’s service, for a sign either of our
admission into the kingdom of God, to be of the number of his peculiar
people, or for a commemoration of the same. In the Old Testament, the
sign of admission was _circumcision_; in the New Testament, _baptism_.
The commemoration of it in the Old Testament, was the _eating_, at a
certain time which was anniversary, of the _Paschal Lamb_; by which they
were put in mind of the night wherein they were delivered out of their
bondage in Egypt; and in the New Testament, the celebrating of the
_Lord’s Supper_; by which, we are put in mind of our deliverance from
the bondage of sin, by our blessed Saviour’s death upon the cross. The
sacraments of _admission_, are but once to be used, because there needs
but one _admission_; but because we have need of being often put in mind
of our deliverance, and of our allegiance, the sacraments of
_commemoration_ have need to be reiterated. And these are the principal
sacraments, and as it were the solemn oaths we make of our allegiance.
There be also other consecrations, that may be called sacraments, as the
word implieth only consecration to God’s service; but as it implies an
oath, or promise of allegiance to God, there were no other in the Old
Testament, but _circumcision_, and the _passover_; nor are there any
other in the New Testament, but _baptism_ and the _Lord’s Supper_.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXXVI.

                  OF THE WORD OF GOD, AND OF PROPHETS.


[Sidenote: Word, what.]

When there is mention of the _word of God_, or of _man_, it doth not
signify a part of speech, such as grammarians call a noun, or a verb, or
any simple voice, without a contexture with other words to make it
significative; but a perfect speech or discourse, whereby the speaker
_affirmeth_, _denieth_, _commandeth_, _promiseth_, _threateneth_,
_wisheth_, or _interrogateth_. In which sense it is not _vocabulum_,
that signifies a _word_; but _sermo_, (in Greek λόγος) that is, some
_speech_, _discourse_, or _saying_.

[Sidenote: The words spoken by God, and concerning God, both are called
           God’s word in Scripture.]

Again, if we say the _word of God_, or of _man_, it may be understood
sometimes of the speaker: as the words that God hath spoken, or that a
man hath spoken; in which sense, when we say, the Gospel of St. Matthew,
we understand St. Matthew to be the writer of it: and sometimes of the
subject; in which sense, when we read in the Bible, _the words of the
days of the kings of Israel, or Judah_, it is meant, that the acts that
were done in those days, were the subject of those words; and in the
Greek, which, in the Scripture, retaineth many Hebraisms, by the word of
God is oftentimes meant, not that which is spoken by God, but concerning
God, and his government; that is to say, the doctrine of religion:
insomuch, as it is all one, to say λόγος Θεοῦ, and _theologia_; which
is, that doctrine which we usually call _divinity_, as is manifest by
the places following, (_Acts_ xiii. 46) _Then Paul and Barnabas waxed
bold, and said, it was necessary that the word of God should first have
been spoken to you, but seeing you put it from you, and judge yourselves
unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles_. That which
is here called the word of God, was the doctrine of Christian religion;
as it appears evidently by that which goes before. And (_Acts_ v. 20)
where it is said to the apostles by an angel, _Go stand and speak in the
Temple, all the words of this life_; by the words of this life, is
meant, the doctrine of the Gospel; as is evident by what they did in the
Temple, and is expressed in the last verse of the same chapter, _Daily
in the Temple, and in every house they ceased not to teach and preach
Christ Jesus_: in which place it is manifest, that Jesus Christ was the
subject of this _word of life_; or, which is all one, the subject of the
_words of this life eternal_, that our Saviour offered them. So (_Acts_
xv. 7) the word of God, is called _the word of the Gospel_, because it
containeth the doctrine of the kingdom of Christ; and the same word
(_Rom._ x. 8, 9) is called _the word of faith_; that is, as is there
expressed, the doctrine of Christ come, and raised from the dead. Also
(_Matth._ xiii. 19) _When any one heareth the word of the kingdom_; that
is, the doctrine of the kingdom taught by Christ. Again, the same word,
is said (_Acts_ xii. 24) _to grow and to be multiplied_; which to
understand of the evangelical doctrine is easy, but of the voice or
speech of God, hard and strange. In the same sense (_1 Tim._ iv. 1) the
_doctrine of devils_ signifieth not the words of any devil, but the
doctrine of heathen men concerning _demons_, and those phantasms which
they worshipped as gods.

[Sidenote: The word of God metaphorically used, first, for the decrees
           and power of God.]

Considering these two significations of the WORD OF GOD, as it is taken
in Scripture, it is manifest in this latter sense, where it is taken for
the doctrine of Christian religion, that the whole Scripture is the word
of God: but in the former sense, not so. For example, though these
words, _I am the Lord thy God, &c._ to the end of the Ten Commandments,
were spoken by God to Moses; yet the preface, _God spake these words and
said_, is to be understood for the words of him that wrote the holy
history. The _word of God_, as it is taken for that which he hath
spoken, is understood sometimes _properly_, sometimes _metaphorically_.
_Properly_, as the words he hath spoken to his prophets:
_metaphorically_, for his wisdom, power, and eternal decree, in making
the world; in which sense, those fiats, _Let there be light_, _Let there
be a firmament_, _Let us make man, &c._ (_Gen._ i.) are the word of God.
And in the same sense it is said (_John_ i. 3) _All things were made by
it, and without it was nothing made that was made_: and (_Heb._ i. 3)
_He upholdeth all things by the word of his power_; that is, by the
power of his word; that is, by his power: and (_Heb._ xi. 3) _The worlds
were framed by the word of God_; and many other places to the same
sense: as also amongst the Latins, the name of _fate_, which signified
properly _the word spoken_, is taken in the same sense.

[Sidenote: Secondly, for the effect of his word.]

Secondly, for the effect of his word; that is to say, for the thing
itself, which by his word is affirmed, commanded, threatened, or
promised; as (_Psalm_ cv. 19) where Joseph is said to have been kept in
prison, _till his word was come_; that is, till that was come to pass
which he had foretold to Pharaoh’s butler (_Gen._ xl. 13) concerning his
being restored to his office: for there, by _his word was come_, is
meant, the thing itself was come to pass. So also (_1 Kings_ xviii. 36)
Elijah saith to God, _I have done all these thy words_, instead of _I
have done all these things at thy word_, or commandment; and (_Jer._
xvii. 15) _Where is the word of the Lord_, is put for, _Where is the
evil he threatened_. And (_Ezek._ xii. 28) _There shall none of my words
be prolonged any more_: by _words_ are understood those _things_, which
God promised to his people. And in the New Testament (_Matth._ xxiv. 35)
_heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away_;
that is, there is nothing that I have promised or foretold, that shall
not come to pass. And in this sense it is, that St. John the Evangelist,
and, I think, St. John only, calleth our Saviour himself as in the flesh
_the word of God_, as (_John_ i. 14) _the word was made flesh_; that is
to say, the word, or promise that Christ should come into the world;
_who in the beginning was with God_; that is to say, it was in the
purpose of God the Father, to send God the Son into the world, to
enlighten men in the way of eternal life; but it was not till then put
in execution, and actually incarnate. So that our Saviour is there
called the _word_, not because he was the promise, but the thing
promised. They that taking occasion from this place, do commonly call
him the verb of God, do but render the text more obscure. They might as
well term him the noun of God: for as by _noun_, so also by _verb_, men
understand nothing but a part of speech, a voice, a sound, that neither
affirms, nor denies, nor commands, nor promiseth, nor is any substance
corporeal, or spiritual; and therefore it cannot be said to be either
God, or man; whereas our Saviour is both. And this _word_, which St.
John in his gospel saith was with God, is (in his _first Epistle_, verse
1) called the _word of life_; and (verse 2) _the eternal life, which was
with the Father_. So that he can be in no other sense called the _word_,
than in that, wherein he is called eternal life; that is, _he that hath
procured us eternal life_, by his coming in the flesh. So also
(_Apocalypse_ xix. 13) the apostle speaking of Christ, clothed in a
garment dipped in blood, saith, his name is _the word of God_; which is
to be understood, as if he had said his name had been, _He that was come
according to the purpose of God from the beginning, and according to his
word and promises delivered by the prophets_. So that there is nothing
here of the incarnation of a word, but of the incarnation of God the
Son, therefore called _the word_, because his incarnation was the
performance of the promise; in like manner as the Holy Ghost is called
(_Acts_ i. 4; _Luke_ xxiv. 49) _the promise_.

[Sidenote: Thirdly, for the words of reason and equity.]

There are also places of the Scripture, where, by the _word of God_, is
signified such words as are consonant to reason and equity, though
spoken sometimes neither by prophet, nor by a holy man. For
Pharaoh-Necho was an idolater; yet his words to the good king Josiah, in
which he advised him by messengers, not to oppose him in his march
against Charchemish, are said to have proceeded from the mouth of God;
and that Josiah, not hearkening to them, was slain in the battle; as is
to be read (_2 Chron._ xxxv. 21, 22, 23.) It is true, that as the same
history is related in the first book of Esdras, not Pharaoh, but
Jeremiah, spake these words to Josiah, from the mouth of the Lord. But
we are to give credit to the canonical Scripture, whatsoever be written
in the Apocrypha.

The _word of God_, is then also to be taken for the dictates of reason
and equity, when the same is said in the Scriptures to be written in
man’s heart; as _Psalm_ xxxvii. 31; _Jer._ xxxi. 33; _Deut._ xxx. 11,
14, and many other like places.

[Sidenote: Divers acceptions of the word prophet.]

The name of PROPHET signifieth in Scripture, sometimes _prolocutor_;
that is, he that speaketh from God to man, or from man to God: and
sometimes _predictor_, or a foreteller of things to come: and sometimes
one that speaketh incoherently, as men that are distracted. It is most
frequently used in the sense of speaking from God to the people. So
Moses, Samuel, Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others were _prophets_. And
in this sense the high-priest was a _prophet_, for he only went into the
_sanctum sanctorum_, to enquire of God; and was to declare his answer to
the people. And therefore when Caiphas said, it was expedient that one
man should die for the people, St. John saith (chapter xi. 51) that _He
spake not this of himself, but being high-priest that year, he
prophesied that one man should die for the nation_. Also they that in
Christian congregations taught the people, (_1 Cor._ xiv. 3) are said to
prophecy. In the like sense it is, that God saith to Moses (_Exod._ iv.
16) concerning Aaron, _He shall be thy spokesman to the people; and he
shall be to thee a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God_: that
which here is _spokesman_, is (_Exod._ vii. 1) interpreted prophet;
_See_, saith God, _I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy
brother shall be thy prophet_. In the sense of speaking from man to God,
Abraham is called a prophet (_Gen._ xx. 7) where God in a dream speaketh
to Abimelech in this manner, _Now therefore restore the man his wife,
for he is a prophet, and shall pray for thee_; whereby may be also
gathered, that the name of prophet may be given, not unproperly, to them
that in Christian churches, have a calling to say public prayers for the
congregation. In the same sense, the prophets that came down from the
high place, or hill of God, with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe,
and a harp (_1 Sam._ x. 5, 6, and 10), Saul amongst them, are said to
prophecy, in that they praised God in that manner publicly. In the like
sense, is Miriam (_Exod._ xv. 20) called a prophetess. So is it also to
be taken (_1 Cor._ xi. 4, 5), where St. Paul saith, _Every man that
prayeth or prophecieth with his head covered, &c., and every woman that
prayeth or prophecieth with her head uncovered_: for prophecy, in that
place, signifieth no more, but praising God in psalms and holy songs;
which women might do in the church, though it were not lawful for them
to speak to the congregation. And in this signification it is, that the
poets of the heathen, that composed hymns and other sorts of poems in
the honour of their gods, were called _vates_, prophets; as is well
enough known by all that are versed in the books of the Gentiles, and as
is evident (_Tit._ i. 12), where St. Paul saith of the Cretians, that a
prophet of their own said, they were liars; not that St. Paul held their
poets for prophets, but acknowledgeth that the word prophet was commonly
used to signify them that celebrated the honour of God in verse.

[Sidenote: Prediction of future contingents, not always prophecy.]

When by prophecy is meant prediction, or foretelling of future
contingents; not only they were prophets, who were God’s spokesmen, and
foretold those things to others, which God had foretold to them; but
also all those impostors, that pretend, by help of familiar spirits, or
by superstitious divination of events past, from false causes, to
foretel the like events in time to come: of which, as I have declared
already in the twelfth chapter of this discourse, there be many kinds,
who gain in the opinion of the common sort of men, a greater reputation
of prophecy, by one casual event that may be but wrested to their
purpose, than can be lost again by never so many failings. Prophecy is
not an art, nor, when it is taken for prediction, a constant vocation;
but an extraordinary, and temporary employment from God, most often of
good men, but sometimes also of the wicked. The woman of Endor, who is
said to have had a familiar spirit, and thereby to have raised a
phantasm of Samuel, and foretold Saul his death, was not therefore a
prophetess; for neither had she any science, whereby she could raise
such a phantasm; nor does it appear that God commanded the raising of
it; but only guided that imposture to be a means of Saul’s terror and
discouragement, and by consequent, of the discomfiture by which he fell.
And for incoherent speech, it was amongst the Gentiles taken for one
sort of prophecy, because the prophets of their oracles, intoxicated
with a spirit or vapour from the cave of the Pythian oracle at Delphi,
were for the time really mad, and spake like madmen; of whose loose
words a sense might be made to fit any event, in such sort, as all
bodies are said to be made of _materia prima_. In Scripture I find it
also so taken (_1 Sam._ xviii. 10) in these words, _And the evil spirit
came upon Saul, and he prophecied in the midst of the house_.

[Sidenote: The manner how God hath spoken to the prophets.]

And although there be so many significations in Scripture of the word
_prophet_; yet is that the most frequent, in which it is taken for him,
to whom God speaketh immediately that which the prophet is to say from
him, to some other man, or to the people. And hereupon a question may be
asked, in what manner God speaketh to such a prophet. Can it, may some
say, be properly said, that God hath voice and language, when it cannot
be properly said, he hath a tongue, or other organs, as a man? The
prophet David argueth thus, (_Psalm_ xciv. 9) _Shall he that made the
eye, not see? or he that made the ear, not hear?_ But this may be
spoken, not as usually, to signify God’s nature, but to signify our
intention to honour him. For to _see_, and _hear_, are honourable
attributes, and may be given to God, to declare, as far as our capacity
can conceive, his almighty power. But if it were to be taken in the
strict and proper sense, one might argue from his making of all other
parts of man’s body, that he had also the same use of them which we
have; which would be many of them so uncomely, as it would be the
greatest contumely in the world to ascribe them to him. Therefore we are
to interpret God’s speaking to men immediately, for that way, whatsoever
it be, by which God makes them understand his will. And the ways whereby
he doth this, are many, and to be sought only in the Holy Scripture:
where though many times it be said, that God spake to this, and that
person, without declaring in what manner; yet there be again many
places, that deliver also the signs by which they were to acknowledge
his presence, and commandment; and by these may be understood, how he
spake to many of the rest.

[Sidenote: To the extraordinary prophets of the Old Testament he spake
           by dreams, or visions.]

In what manner God spake to Adam, and Eve, and Cain, and Noah, is not
expressed; nor how he spake to Abraham, till such time as he came out of
his own country to Sichem in the land of Canaan; and then (_Gen._ xii.
7) God is said to have _appeared_ to him. So there is one way, whereby
God made his presence manifest; that is, by an _apparition_, or
_vision_. And again, (_Gen._ xv. 1) _the word of the Lord came to
Abraham in a vision_; that is to say, somewhat, as a sign of God’s
presence, appeared as God’s messenger, to speak to him. Again, the Lord
appeared to Abraham (_Gen._ xviii. 1) by an apparition of three angels;
and to Abimelech (Gen. xx. 3) in a dream: to Lot (_Gen._ xix. 1) by an
apparition of two angels: and to Agar (_Gen._ xxi. 17) by the apparition
of one angel: and to Abraham again (_Gen._ xxii. 11) by the apparition
of a voice from heaven: and (_Gen._ xxvi. 24) to Isaac in the night,
that is, in his sleep, or by dream: and to Jacob (_Gen._ xxviii. 12) in
a dream; that is to say, as are the words of the text, _Jacob dreamed
that he saw a ladder, &c._: and (_Gen._ xxxii. 1) in a vision of angels:
and to Moses (_Exod._ iii. 2) in the apparition of a flame of fire out
of the midst of a bush. And after the time of Moses, where the manner
how God spake immediately to man in the Old Testament is expressed, he
spake always by a vision, or by a dream; as to Gideon, Samuel, Eliah,
Elisha, Isaiah, Ezekiel, and the rest of the prophets; and often in the
New Testament, as to Joseph, to St. Peter, to St. Paul, and to St. John
the Evangelist in the Apocalypse.

Only to Moses he spake in a more extraordinary manner in Mount Sinai,
and in the Tabernacle; and to the high-priest in the Tabernacle, and in
the _sanctum sanctorum_ of the Temple. But Moses, and after him the
high-priests, were prophets of a more eminent place and degree in God’s
favour; and God himself in express words declareth, that to other
prophets he spake in dreams and visions, but to his servant Moses, in
such manner as a man speaketh to his friend. The words are these
(_Numb._ xii. 6, 7, 8) _If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will
make myself known to him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a
dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all my house; with
him I will speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, not in dark speeches;
and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold._ And (_Exod._ xxxiii.
11) _The Lord spake to Moses face to face, as a man speaketh to his
friend_. And yet this speaking of God to Moses, was by mediation of an
angel, or angels, as appears expressly, _Acts_ vii. 35 and 53, and
_Gal._ iii. 19; and was therefore a vision, though a more clear vision
than was given to other prophets. And conformable hereunto, where God
saith (_Deut._ xiii. 1) _If there arise amongst you a prophet, or
dreamer of dreams_, the latter word is but the interpretation of the
former. And (_Joel_, ii. 28) _Your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy; your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see
visions_; where again, the word _prophecy_ is expounded by _dream_, and
_vision_. And in the same manner it was, that God spake to Solomon,
promising him wisdom, riches, and honour; for the text saith, (_1 Kings_
iii. 15) _And Solomon awoke, and behold it was a dream_; so that
generally the prophets extraordinary in the Old Testament took notice of
the word of God no otherwise than from their dreams, or visions; that is
to say, from the imaginations which they had in their sleep, or in an
extasy: which imaginations in every true prophet were supernatural; but
in false prophets were either natural or feigned.

The same prophets were nevertheless said to speak by the spirit; as
(_Zech._ vii. 12); where the prophet speaking of the Jews, saith, _They
made their hearts hard as adamant, lest they should hear the law, and
the words which the Lord of Hosts hath sent in his Spirit by the former
prophets_. By which it is manifest, that speaking by the _spirit_, or
_inspiration_, was not a particular manner of God’s speaking, different
from vision, when they, that were said to speak by the Spirit, were
extraordinary prophets, such as for every new message, were to have a
peculiar commission, or, which is all one, a new dream, or vision.

[Sidenote: To prophets of perpetual calling, and supreme, God spake in
           the Old Testament from the mercy seat, in a manner not
           expressed in the Scripture.]

Of prophets, that were so by a perpetual calling in the Old Testament,
some were _supreme_, and some _subordinate_: supreme were first Moses;
and after him the high-priests, every one for his time, as long as the
priesthood was royal; and after the people of the Jews had rejected God,
that he should no more reign over them, those kings which submitted
themselves to God’s government, were also his chief prophets; and the
high-priest’s office became ministerial. And when God was to be
consulted, they put on the holy vestments, and enquired of the Lord, as
the king commanded them, and were deprived of their office, when the
king thought fit. For king Saul (_1 Sam._ xiii. 9) commanded the burnt
offering to be brought, and (_1 Sam._ xiv. 18) he commands the priests
to bring the ark near him; and (v. 19) again to let it alone, because he
saw an advantage upon his enemies. And in the same chapter (v. 37) Saul
asketh counsel of God. In like manner king David, after his being
anointed, though before he had possession of the kingdom, is said to
_enquire of the Lord_ (_1 Sam._ xxiii. 2) whether he should fight
against the Philistines at Keilah; and (verse 9) David commandeth the
priest to bring him the ephod, to enquire whether he should stay in
Keilah, or not. And king Solomon (_1 Kings_ ii. 27) took the priesthood
from Abiathar, and gave it (verse 35) to Zadok. Therefore Moses, and the
high-priests, and the pious kings, who enquired of God on all
extraordinary occasions, how they were to carry themselves, or what
event they were to have, were all sovereign prophets. But in what manner
God spake unto them is not manifest. To say that when Moses went up to
God in Mount Sinai, it was a dream or vision, such as other prophets
had, is contrary to that distinction which God made between Moses and
other prophets (_Numb._ xii. 6, 7, 8). To say God spake or appeared as
he is in his own nature, is to deny his infiniteness, invisibility,
incomprehensibility. To say he spake by inspiration, or infusion of the
Holy Spirit, as the Holy Spirit signifieth the Deity, is to make Moses
equal with Christ, in whom only the Godhead (as St. Paul speaketh,
_Col._ ii. 9) dwelleth bodily. And lastly, to say he spake by the Holy
Spirit, as it signifieth the graces or gifts of the Holy Spirit, is to
attribute nothing to him supernatural. For God disposeth men to piety,
justice, mercy, truth, faith, and all manner of virtue, both moral and
intellectual, by doctrine, example, and by several occasions, natural
and ordinary.

And as these ways cannot be applied to God in his speaking to Moses, at
Mount Sinai; so also, they cannot be applied to him, in his speaking to
the high-priests, from the mercy-seat. Therefore in what manner God
spake to those sovereign prophets of the Old Testament, whose office it
was to enquire of him, is not intelligible. In the time of the New
Testament, there was no sovereign prophet, but our Saviour; who was both
God that spake, and the prophet to whom he spake.

[Sidenote: To prophets of perpetual calling, but subordinate, God spake
           by the spirit.]

To subordinate prophets of perpetual calling, I find not any place that
proveth God spake to them supernaturally; but only in such manner, as
naturally he inclineth men to piety, to belief, to righteousness, and to
other virtues all other Christian men. Which way, though it consist in
constitution, instruction, education, and the occasions and invitements
men have to Christian virtues; yet it is truly attributed to the
operation of the Spirit of God, or Holy Spirit, which we in our language
call the Holy Ghost: for there is no good inclination, that is not of
the operation of God. But these operations are not always supernatural.
When therefore a prophet is said to speak in the spirit, or by the
spirit of God, we are to understand no more, but that he speaks
according to God’s will, declared by the supreme prophet. For the most
common acceptation of the word spirit, is in the signification of a
man’s intention, mind, or disposition.

In the time of Moses, there were seventy men besides himself, that
_prophecied_ in the camp of the Israelites. In what manner God spake to
them, is declared in _Numbers_, chap. xi. verse 25. _The Lord came down
in a cloud, and spake unto Moses, and took of the spirit that was upon
him, and gave it to the seventy elders. And it came to pass, when the
spirit rested upon them, they prophecied and did not cease._ By which it
is manifest, first, that their prophecying to the people was subservient
and subordinate to the prophecying of Moses; for that God took of the
spirit of Moses, to put upon them; so that they prophecied as Moses
would have them: otherwise they had not been suffered to prophecy at
all. For there was (verse 27) a complaint made against them to Moses;
and Joshua would have Moses to have forbidden them; which he did not,
but said to Joshua, _be not jealous in my behalf_. Secondly, that the
spirit of God in that place signifieth nothing but the mind and
disposition to obey and assist Moses in the administration of the
government. For if it were meant they had the substantial spirit of God;
that is, the divine nature, inspired into them, then they had it in no
less manner than Christ himself, in whom only the spirit of God dwelt
bodily. It is meant therefore of the gift and grace of God, that guided
them to cooperate with Moses; from whom their spirit was derived. And it
appeareth (_Numb._ xi. 16) that they were such as Moses himself should
appoint for elders and officers of the people: for the words are,
_Gather unto me seventy men, whom thou knowest to be elders and officers
of the people_: where, _thou knowest_, is the same with _thou
appointest_, or _hast appointed to be such_. For we are told before
(_Exod._ xviii. 24) that Moses following the counsel of Jethro, his
father-in-law, did appoint judges and officers over the people, such as
feared God; and of these were those seventy, whom God, by putting upon
them Moses’ spirit, inclined to aid Moses in the administration of the
kingdom: and in this sense the spirit of God is said (_1 Sam._ xvi. 13,
14) presently upon the anointing of David, to have come upon David, and
left Saul; God giving his graces to him he chose to govern his people,
and taking them away from him he rejected. So that by the spirit is
meant inclination to God’s service; and not any supernatural revelation.

[Sidenote: God sometimes also spake by lots.]

God spake also many times by the event of lots; which were ordered by
such as he had put in authority over his people. So we read that God
manifested by the lots which Saul caused to be drawn (_1 Sam._ xiv. 43)
the fault that Jonathan had committed, in eating a honey-comb, contrary
to the oath taken by the people. And (_Josh._ xviii. 10) God divided the
land of Canaan amongst the Israelites, by the _lots that Joshua did cast
before the Lord in Shiloh_. In the same manner it seemeth to be, that
God discovered (_Joshua_ vii. 16, &c.) the crime of Achan. And these are
the ways whereby God declared his will in the Old Testament.

All which ways he used also in the New Testament. To the Virgin Mary, by
a vision of an angel: to Joseph in a dream: again, to Paul, in the way
to Damascus, in a vision of our Saviour: and to Peter in the vision of a
sheet let down from heaven, with divers sorts of flesh; of clean, and
unclean beasts; and in prison, by vision of an angel: and to all the
apostles, and writers of the New Testament, by the graces of his spirit;
and to the apostles again, at the choosing of Matthias in the place of
Judas Iscariot, by lot.

[Sidenote: Every man ought to examine the probability of a pretended
           prophet’s calling.]

Seeing then, all prophecy supposeth vision, or dream, (which two, when
they be natural, are the same), or some especial gift of God so rarely
observed in mankind as to be admired where observed; and seeing as well
such gifts, as the most extraordinary dreams and visions, may proceed
from God, not only by his supernatural, and immediate, but also by his
natural operation, and by mediation of second causes; there is need of
reason and judgment to discern between natural, and supernatural gifts,
and between natural, and supernatural visions or dreams. And
consequently men had need to be very circumspect and wary, in obeying
the voice of man, that pretending himself to be a prophet, requires us
to obey God in that way, which he in God’s name telleth us to be the way
to happiness. For he that pretends to teach men the way of so great
felicity, pretends to govern them; that is to say, to rule and reign
over them; which is a thing, that all men naturally desire, and is
therefore worthy to be suspected of ambition and imposture; and
consequently, ought to be examined and tried by every man, before he
yield them obedience; unless he have yielded it them already, in the
institution of a commonwealth; as when the prophet is the civil
sovereign, or by the civil sovereign authorized. And if this examination
of prophets and spirits, were not allowed to every one of the people, it
had been to no purpose to set out the marks, by which every man might be
able to distinguish between those, whom they ought, and those whom they
ought not to follow. Seeing therefore such marks are set out (_Deut._
xiii. 1, &c.) to know a prophet by; and (_1 John_ iv. 1, &c.) to know a
spirit by: and seeing there is so much prophecying in the Old Testament,
and so much preaching in the New Testament, against prophets; and so
much greater a number ordinarily of false prophets, than of true; every
one is to beware of obeying their directions, at their own peril. And
first, that there were many more false than true prophets, appears by
this, that when Ahab (_1 Kings_ xxii.) consulted four hundred prophets,
they were all false impostors, but only one Micaiah. And a little before
the time of the captivity, the prophets were generally liars. _The
prophets_, (saith the Lord, by _Jeremiah_, chapter xiv. 14) _prophecy
lies in my name. I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, nor
spake unto them; they prophecy to you a false vision, a thing of nought,
and the deceit of their heart._ Insomuch as God commanded the people by
the mouth of the prophet Jeremiah (chapter xxiii. 16) not to obey them:
_Thus saith the Lord of hosts, hearken not unto the words of the
prophets, that prophecy to you. They make you vain, they speak a vision
of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord._

[Sidenote: All prophecy but of the sovereign prophet, is to be examined
           by every subject.]

Seeing then there was in the time of the Old Testament, such quarrels
amongst the visionary prophets, one contesting with another, and asking,
_when departed the Spirit from me, to go to thee?_ as between Micaiah
and the rest of the four hundred; and such giving of the lie to one
another, (as in _Jerem._ xiv. 14) and such controversies in the New
Testament at this day, amongst the spiritual prophets; every man then
was, and now is bound to make use of his natural reason, to apply to all
prophecy those rules which God hath given us, to discern the true from
false. Of which rules, in the Old Testament, one was, conformable
doctrine to that which Moses the sovereign prophet had taught them; and
the other, the miraculous power of foretelling what God would bring to
pass, as I have already showed out of _Deut._ xiii. 1, &c. And in the
New Testament there was but one only mark; and that was the preaching of
this doctrine, _that Jesus is the Christ_, that is, king of the Jews,
promised in the Old Testament. Whosoever denied that article, he was a
false prophet, whatsoever miracles he might seem to work; and he that
taught it was a true prophet. For St. John (_1 Epist._ iv. 2, &c.)
speaking expressly of the means to examine spirits, whether they be of
God, or not; after he had told them that there would arise false
prophets, saith thus, _Hereby know ye the Spirit of God. Every spirit
that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God_; that
is, is approved and allowed as a prophet of God: not that he is a godly
man, or one of the elect, for this, that he confesseth, professeth, or
preacheth Jesus to be the Christ; but for that he is a prophet avowed.
For God sometimes speaketh by prophets, whose persons he hath not
accepted; as he did by Balaam; and as he foretold Saul of his death, by
the Witch of Endor. Again in the next verse, _Every spirit that
confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of Christ;
and this is the spirit of Anti-Christ_. So that the rule is perfect on
both sides; that he is a true prophet, which preacheth the Messiah
already come, in the person of Jesus; and he a false one that denieth
him come, and looketh for him in some future impostor, that shall take
upon him that honour falsely, whom the apostle there properly calleth
Anti-Christ. Every man therefore ought to consider who is the sovereign
prophet; that is to say, who it is, that is God’s vicegerent on earth;
and hath next under God, the authority of governing Christian men; and
to observe for a rule, that doctrine, which in the name of God, he hath
commanded to be taught; and thereby to examine and try out the truth of
those doctrines, which pretended prophets with miracle, or without,
shall at any time advance: and if they find it contrary to that rule, to
do as they did, that came to Moses, and complained that there were some
that prophecied in the camp, whose authority so to do they doubted of;
and leave to the sovereign, as they did to Moses, to uphold, or to
forbid them, as he should see cause; and if he disavow them, then no
more to obey their voice; or if he approve them, then to obey them, as
men to whom God hath given a part of the spirit of their sovereign. For
when Christian men, take not their Christian sovereign, for God’s
prophet; they must either take their own dreams, for the prophecy they
mean to be governed by, and the tumor of their own hearts for the Spirit
of God; or they must suffer themselves to be led by some strange prince;
or by some of their fellow-subjects, that can bewitch them, by slander
of the government, into rebellion, without other miracle to confirm
their calling, than sometimes an extraordinary success and impunity; and
by this means destroying all laws, both divine and human, reduce all
order, government, and society, to the first chaos of violence and civil
war.


                                -------


                            CHAPTER XXXVII.

                      OF MIRACLES, AND THEIR USE.


[Sidenote: A miracle is a work that causeth admiration.]

By _miracles_ are signified the admirable works of God: and therefore
they are also called _wonders_. And because they are for the most part,
done, for a signification of his commandment, in such occasions, as
without them, men are apt to doubt, (following their private natural
reasoning,) what he hath commanded, and what not, they are commonly, in
holy Scripture, called _signs_, in the same sense, as they are called by
the Latins, _ostenta_, and _portenta_, from showing and fore-signifying
that, which the Almighty is about to bring to pass.

[Sidenote: And must therefore be rare, and whereof there is no natural
           cause known.]

To understand therefore what is a miracle, we must first understand what
works they are, which men wonder at, and call admirable. And there be
but two things which make men wonder at any event: the one is, if it be
strange, that is to say, such as the like of it hath never, or very
rarely been produced: the other is, if when it is produced, we cannot
imagine it to have been done by natural means, but only by the immediate
hand of God. But when we see some possible, natural cause of it, how
rarely soever the like has been done, or if the like have been often
done, how impossible soever it be to imagine a natural means thereof, we
no more wonder, nor esteem it for a miracle.

Therefore, if a horse or cow should speak, it were a miracle; because
both the thing is strange, and the natural cause difficult to imagine.
So also were it to see a strange deviation of nature, in the production
of some new shape of a living creature. But when a man, or other animal,
engenders his like, though we know no more how this is done, than the
other; yet because it is usual, it is no miracle. In like manner, if a
man be metamorphosed into a stone, or into a pillar, it is a miracle;
because strange: but if a piece of wood be so changed; because we see it
often, it is no miracle: and yet we know no more by what operation of
God, the one is brought to pass, than the other.

The first rainbow that was seen in the world, was a miracle, because the
first; and consequently strange; and served for a sign from God, placed
in heaven, to assure his people, there should be no more any universal
destruction of the world by water. But at this day, because they are
frequent, they are not miracles, neither to them that know their natural
causes, nor to them who know them not. Again, there be many rare works
produced by the art of man: yet when we know they are done; because
thereby we know also the means how they are done, we count them not for
miracles, because not wrought by the immediate hand of God, but of human
industry.

[Sidenote: That which seemeth a miracle to one man, may seem otherwise
           to another.]

Furthermore, seeing admiration and wonder are consequent to the
knowledge and experience, wherewith men are endued, some more, some
less; it followeth, that the same thing may be a miracle to one, and not
to another. And thence it is, that ignorant and superstitious men make
great wonders of those works, which other men, knowing to proceed from
nature, (which is not the immediate, but the ordinary work of God),
admire not at all: as when eclipses of the sun and moon have been taken
for supernatural works, by the common people; when nevertheless, there
were others, who could from their natural causes have foretold the very
hour they should arrive: or, as when a man, by confederacy and secret
intelligence, getting knowledge of the private actions of an ignorant,
unwary man, thereby tells him what he has done in former time; it seems
to him a miraculous thing; but amongst wise, and cautelous men, such
miracles as those, cannot easily be done.

[Sidenote: The end of miracles.]

Again, it belongeth to the nature of a miracle, that it be wrought for
the procuring of credit to God’s messengers, ministers, and prophets,
that thereby men may know, they are called, sent, and employed by God,
and thereby be the better inclined to obey them. And therefore, though
the creation of the world, and after that the destruction of all living
creatures in the universal deluge, were admirable works; yet because
they were not done to procure credit to any prophet, or other minister
of God, they use not to be called miracles. For how admirable soever any
work be, the admiration consisteth not in that it could be done; because
men naturally believe the Almighty can do all things; but because he
does it at the prayer or word of a man. But the works of God in Egypt,
by the hand of Moses, were properly miracles; because they were done
with intention to make the people of Israel believe, that Moses came
unto them, not out of any design of his own interest, but as sent from
God. Therefore, after God had commanded him to deliver the Israelites
from the Egyptian bondage, when he said (_Exod._ iv. 1) _They will not
believe me, but will say, the Lord hath not appeared unto me_, God gave
him power, to turn the rod he had in his hand into a serpent, and again
to return it into a rod; and by putting his hand into his bosom, to make
it leprous; and again by putting it out, to make it whole; to make the
children of Israel believe (as it is in verse 5) that the God of their
fathers had appeared unto him: and if that were not enough, he gave him
power to turn their waters into blood. And when he had done these
miracles before the people, it is said (verse 31) that _they believed
him_. Nevertheless, for fear of Pharaoh, they durst not yet obey him.
Therefore the other works which were done to plague Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, tended all to make the Israelites believe in Moses, and were
properly miracles. In like manner if we consider all the miracles done
by the hand of Moses, and all the rest of the prophets, till the
captivity; and those of our Saviour, and his apostles afterwards; we
shall find, their end was always to beget or confirm belief, that they
came not of their own motion, but were sent by God. We may farther
observe in Scripture, that the end of miracles, was to beget belief, not
universally in all men, elect and reprobate; but in the elect only; that
is to say, in such as God had determined should become his subjects. For
those miraculous plagues of Egypt, had not for their end, the conversion
of Pharaoh; for God had told Moses before, that he would harden the
heart of Pharoah, that he should not let the people go: and when he let
them go at last, not the miracles persuaded him, but the plagues forced
him to it. So also of our Saviour, it is written (_Matth._ xiii. 58),
that he wrought not many miracles in his own country, because of their
unbelief; and (in _Mark_ vi. 5) instead of, _He wrought not many_, it
is, _He could work none_. It was not because he wanted power; which to
say, were blasphemy against God; nor that the end of miracles was not to
convert incredulous men to Christ; for the end of all the miracles of
Moses, of the prophets, of our Saviour, and of his apostles was to add
men to the church: but it was, because the end of their miracles, was to
add to the church, not all men, but such as should be saved; that is to
say, such as God had elected. Seeing therefore our Saviour was sent from
his Father, he could not use his power in the conversion of those, whom
his Father had rejected. They that expounding this place of _St. Mark_,
say, that this word, _He could not_, is put for, _He would not_, do it
without example in the Greek tongue: where _would not_, is put sometimes
for _could not_, in things inanimate, that have no will; but _could
not_, for _would not_ never: and thereby lay a stumbling block before
weak Christians; as if Christ could do no miracles, but amongst the
credulous.

[Sidenote: The definition of a miracle.]

From that which I have here set down, of the nature and use of a
miracle, we may define it thus: A MIRACLE _is a work of God, (besides
his operation by the way of nature, ordained in the creation) done, for
the making manifest to his elect, the mission of an extraordinary
minister for their salvation_.

And from this definition, we may infer; first, that in all miracles, the
work done, is not the effect of any virtue in the prophet; because it is
the effect of the immediate hand of God; that is to say God hath done
it, without using the prophet therein, as a subordinate cause.

Secondly, that no devil, angel, or other created spirit, can do a
miracle. For it must either be by virtue of some natural science, or by
incantation, that is, by virtue of words. For if the enchanters do it by
their own power independent, there is some power that proceedeth not
from God; which all men deny: and if they do it by power given them,
then is the work not from the immediate hand of God, but natural, and
consequently no miracle.

There be some texts of Scripture, that seem to attribute the power of
working wonders, equal to some of those immediate miracles wrought by
God himself, to certain arts of magic and incantation. As for example,
when we read that after the rod of Moses being cast on the ground became
a serpent, (_Exod._ vii. 11) _the magicians of Egypt did the like by
their enchantments_; and that after Moses had turned the waters of the
Egyptian streams, rivers, ponds, and pools of water into blood, (_Exod._
vii. 22) _the magicians did so likewise with their enchantments_; and
that after Moses had by the power of God brought frogs upon the land,
(_Exod._ viii. 7) _the magicians also did so with their enchantments,
and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt_; will not a man be apt to
attribute miracles to enchantments; that is to say, to the efficacy of
the sound of words; and think the same very well proved out of this, and
other such places? And yet there is no place of Scripture, that telleth
us what an enchantment is. If therefore enchantment be not, as many
think it, a working of strange effects by spells and words; but
imposture and delusion, wrought by ordinary means; and so far from
supernatural, as the impostors need not the study so much as of natural
causes, but the ordinary ignorance, stupidity, and superstition of
mankind, to do them; those texts that seem to countenance the power of
magic, witchcraft, and enchantment, must needs have another sense, than
at first sight they seem to bear.

For it is evident enough, that words have no effect, but on those that
understand them; and then they have no other, but to signify the
intentions or passions of them that speak; and thereby produce hope,
fear, or other passions or conceptions in the hearer. Therefore when a
rod seemeth a serpent, or the waters blood, or any other miracle seemeth
done by enchantment; if it be not to the edification of God’s people,
not the rod, nor the water, nor any other thing is enchanted; that is to
say, wrought upon by the words, but the spectator. So that all the
miracle consisteth in this, that the enchanter has deceived a man; which
is no miracle, but a very easy matter to do.

[Sidenote: That men are apt to be deceived by false miracles.]

For such is the ignorance and aptitude to error generally of all men,
but especially of them that have not much knowledge of natural causes,
and of the nature and interests of men; as by innumerable and easy
tricks to be abused. What opinion of miraculous power, before it was
known there was a science of the course of the stars, might a man have
gained, that should have told the people, this hour or day the sun
should be darkened? A juggler by the handling of his goblets and other
trinkets, if it were not now ordinarily practised, would be thought to
do his wonders by the power at least of the devil. A man that hath
practised to speak by drawing in of his breath, (which kind of men in
ancient time were called _ventriloqui_), and so make the weakness of his
voice seem to proceed, not from the weak impulsion of the organs of
speech, but from distance of place, is able to make very many men
believe it is a voice from Heaven, whatsoever he please to tell them.
And for a crafty man, that hath enquired into the secrets, and familiar
confessions that one man ordinarily maketh to another of his actions and
adventures past, to tell them him again is no hard matter; and yet there
be many, that by such means as that obtain the reputation of being
conjurers. But it is too long a business, to reckon up the several sorts
of those men, which the Greeks called θαυματουργοι, that is to say,
workers of things wonderful: and yet these do all they do, by their own
single dexterity. But if we look upon the impostures wrought by
confederacy, there is nothing how impossible soever to be done, that is
impossible to be believed. For two men conspiring, one to seem lame, the
other to cure him with a charm, will deceive many: but many conspiring,
one to seem lame, another so to cure him, and all the rest to bear
witness, will deceive many more.

[Sidenote: Cautions against the imposture of miracles.]

In this aptitude of mankind, to give too hasty belief to pretended
miracles, there can be no better, nor I think any other caution, than
that which God hath prescribed, first by Moses, as I have said before in
the precedent chapter, in the beginning of the xiiith and end of the
xviiith of _Deuteronomy_; that we take not any for prophets, that teach
any other religion, than that which God’s lieutenant, which at that time
was Moses, hath established; nor any, though he teach the same religion,
whose prediction we do not see come to pass. Moses therefore in his
time, and Aaron and his successors in their times, and the sovereign
governor of God’s people, next under God himself, that is to say, the
head of the Church, in all times, are to be consulted, what doctrine he
hath established, before we give credit to a pretended miracle or
prophet. And when that is done, the thing they pretend to be a miracle,
we must both see it done, and use all means possible to consider,
whether it be really done; and not only so, but whether it be such, as
no man can do the like by his natural power, but that it requires the
immediate hand of God. And in this also we must have recourse to God’s
lieutenant, to whom in all doubtful cases, we have submitted our private
judgments. For example; if a man pretend, after certain words spoken
over a piece of bread, that presently God hath made it not bread, but a
god, or a man, or both, and nevertheless it looketh still as like bread
as ever it did; there is no reason for any man to think it really done,
nor consequently to fear him, till he enquire of God, by his vicar or
lieutenant, whether it be done, or not. If he say, not, then followeth
that which Moses saith (_Deut._ xviii. 22) _he hath spoken it
presumptuously, thou shalt not fear him_. If he say, it is done, then he
is not to contradict it. So also if we see not, but only hear tell of a
miracle, we are to consult the lawful Church; that is to say, the lawful
head thereof, how far we are to give credit to the relators of it. And
this is chiefly the case of men, that in these days live under Christian
sovereigns. For in these times, I do not know one man, that ever saw any
such wonderous work, done by the charm, or at the word, or prayer of a
man, that a man endued but with a mediocrity of reason would think
supernatural: and the question is no more, whether what we see done, be
a miracle; whether the miracle we hear, or read of, were a real work,
and not the act of a tongue, or pen; but in plain terms, whether the
report be true, or a lie. In which question we are not every one, to
make our own private reason, or conscience, but the public reason, that
is, the reason of God’s supreme lieutenant, judge; and indeed we have
made him judge already, if we have given him a sovereign power, to do
all that is necessary for our peace and defence. A private man has
always the liberty, because thought is free, to believe or not believe
in his heart those acts that have been given out for miracles, according
as he shall see what benefit can accrue by men’s belief, to those that
pretend or countenance them, and thereby conjecture whether they be
miracles or lies. But when it comes to confession of that faith, the
private reason must submit to the public; that is to say, to God’s
lieutenant. But who is this lieutenant of God, and head of the Church,
shall be considered in its proper place hereafter.


                                -------


                            CHAPTER XXXVIII.

              OF THE SIGNIFICATION IN SCRIPTURE OF ETERNAL
                    LIFE, HELL, SALVATION, THE WORLD
                        TO COME, AND REDEMPTION.


The maintenance of civil society depending on justice, and justice on
the power of life and death, and other less rewards and punishments,
residing in them that have the sovereignty of the commonwealth; it is
impossible a commonwealth should stand, where any other than the
sovereign hath a power of giving greater rewards than life, and of
inflicting greater punishments than death. Now seeing _eternal life_ is
a greater reward than the _life present_; and _eternal torment_ a
greater punishment than the _death of nature_; it is a thing worthy to
be well considered of all men that desire, by obeying authority, to
avoid the calamities of confusion and civil war, what is meant in Holy
Scripture, by _life eternal_, and _torment eternal_; and for what
offences, and against whom committed, men are to be _eternally
tormented_; and for what actions they are to obtain _eternal life_.

[Sidenote: The place of Adam’s eternity, if he had not sinned, had been
           the terrestrial Paradise.]

And first we find that Adam was created in such a condition of life, as
had he not broken the commandment of God, he had enjoyed it in the
paradise of Eden everlastingly. For there was the _tree of life_,
whereof he was so long allowed to eat, as he should forbear to eat of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil; which was not allowed him. And
therefore as soon as he had eaten of it, God thrust him out of Paradise,
(_Gen._ iii. 22) _lest he should put forth his hand, and take also of
the tree of life and live for ever_. By which it seemeth to me, (with
submission nevertheless both in this, and in all questions whereof the
determination dependeth on the Scriptures, to the interpretation of the
Bible authorized by the commonwealth, whose subject I am), that Adam, if
he had not sinned, had had an eternal life on earth, and that mortality
entered upon himself and his posterity by his first sin. Not that actual
death then entered; for Adam then could never have had children; whereas
he lived long after, and saw a numerous posterity ere he died. But where
it is said, (_Gen._ ii. 17) _In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shalt surely die_, it must needs be meant of his mortality, and
certitude of death. Seeing then eternal life was lost by Adam’s
forfeiture in committing sin, he that should cancel that forfeiture, was
to recover thereby that life again. Now Jesus Christ hath satisfied for
the sins of all that believe in him; and therefore recovered to all
believers, that eternal life which was lost by the sin of Adam. And in
this sense it is that the comparison of St. Paul holdeth, (_Rom._ v. 18,
19) _As by the offence of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came
upon all men to justification of life_; which is again (_1 Cor._ xv. 21,
22) more perspicuously delivered in these words, _For since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive._

[Sidenote: Texts concerning the place of life eternal, for believers.]

Concerning the place wherein men shall enjoy that eternal life which
Christ hath obtained for them, the texts next before alleged seem to
make it on earth. For if as in Adam all die, that is, have forfeited
paradise and eternal life on earth, even so in Christ all shall be made
alive; then all men shall be made to live on earth; for else the
comparison were not proper. Hereunto seemeth to agree that of the
psalmist (_Psalm_. cxxxiii. 3) _upon Zion God commanded the blessing,
even life for evermore_: for Zion is in Jerusalem upon earth: as also
that of St. John (_Rev._ ii. 7) _To him that overcometh I will give to
eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God_.
This was the tree of Adam’s eternal life; but his life was to have been
on earth. The same seemeth to be confirmed again by St. John (_Rev._
xxi. 2), where he saith, _I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem,
coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her
husband_: and again (verse 10) to the same effect: as if he should say,
the new _Jerusalem_, the paradise of God, at the coming again of Christ,
should come down to God’s people from heaven, and not they go up to it
from earth. And this differs nothing from that, which the two men in
white clothing, that is the two angels, said to the apostles that were
looking upon Christ ascending (_Acts_ i. 11) _This same Jesus, who is
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, as you have seen him go up
into heaven_. Which soundeth as if they had said he should come down to
govern them under his Father eternally here, and not take them up to
govern them in heaven; and is conformable to the restoration of the
kingdom of God instituted under Moses, which was a political government
of the Jews on earth. Again, that saying of our Saviour (_Matth._ xxii.
30), _that in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven_, is a description of
an eternal life, resembling that which we lost in Adam in the point of
marriage. For seeing Adam and Eve, if they had not sinned, had lived on
earth eternally in their individual persons; it is manifest, they should
not continually have procreated their kind; for if immortals should have
generated as mankind doth now, the earth in a small time would not have
been able to afford them place to stand on. The Jews that asked our
Saviour the question, whose wife the woman that had married many
brothers should be in the resurrection, knew not what were the
consequences of life eternal: and therefore our Saviour puts them in
mind of this consequence of immortality; that there shall be no
generation, and consequently no marriage, no more than there is marriage
or generation among the angels. The comparison between that eternal life
which Adam lost, and our Saviour by his victory over death hath
recovered, holdeth also in this; that as Adam lost eternal life by his
sin, and yet lived after it for a time, so the faithful Christian hath
recovered eternal life by Christ’s passion, though he die a natural
death, and remain dead for a time, namely, till the resurrection. For as
death is reckoned from the condemnation of Adam, not from the execution;
so life is reckoned from the absolution, not from the resurrection of
them that are elected in Christ.

[Sidenote: Ascension into heaven.]

That the place wherein men are to live eternally, after the
resurrection, is the heavens, (meaning by heaven, those parts of the
world, which are the most remote from earth, as where the stars are, or
above the stars, in another higher heaven, called _cœlum empyreum_,
whereof there is no mention in Scripture, nor ground in reason), is not
easily to be drawn from any text that I can find. By the Kingdom of
Heaven, is meant the kingdom of the King that dwelleth in heaven; and
his kingdom was the people of Israel, whom he ruled by the prophets, his
lieutenants; first Moses, and after him Eleazar, and the sovereign
priests, till in the days of Samuel they rebelled, and would have a
mortal man for their king, after the manner of other nations. And when
our Saviour Christ, by the preaching of his ministers, shall have
persuaded the Jews to return, and called the Gentiles to his obedience,
then shall there be a new kingdom of heaven; because our king shall then
be God, whose _throne_ is heaven: without any necessity evident in the
Scripture, that man shall ascend to his happiness any higher than God’s
_footstool_ the earth. On the contrary, we find written (_John_ iii. 13)
that _no man hath ascended into heaven, but he that came down from
heaven, even the son of man, that is in heaven_. Where I observe by the
way, that these words are not, as those which go immediately before, the
words of our Saviour, but of St. John himself; for Christ was then not
in heaven, but upon the earth. The like is said of David (_Acts_ ii. 34)
where St. Peter, to prove the ascension of Christ, using the words of
the Psalmist (_Psalm_ xvi. 10), _Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell,
nor suffer thine holy one to see corruption_, saith, they were spoken,
not of David, but of Christ; and to prove it, addeth this reason, _For
David is not ascended into heaven_. But to this a man may easily answer,
and say, that though their bodies were not to ascend till the general
day of judgment, yet their souls were in heaven as soon as they were
departed from their bodies; which also seemeth to be confirmed by the
words of our Saviour (_Luke_ xx. 37, 38), who proving the resurrection
out of the words of Moses, saith thus, _That the dead are raised, even
Moses shewed at the bush, when he calleth the Lord, the God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. For he is not a God of the
dead, but of the living; for they all live to him._ But if these words
be to be understood only of the immortality of the soul, they prove not
at all that which our Saviour intended to prove, which was the
resurrection of the body, that is to say, the immortality of the man.
Therefore our Saviour meaneth, that those patriarchs were immortal; not
by a property consequent to the essence and nature of mankind; but by
the will of God, that was pleased of his mere grace, to bestow _eternal
life_ upon the faithful. And though at that time the patriarchs and many
other faithful men were _dead_, yet as it is in the text, they _lived to
God_; that is, they were written in the Book of Life with them that were
absolved of their sins, and ordained to life eternal at the
resurrection. That the soul of man is in its own nature eternal, and a
living creature independent on the body, or that any mere man is
immortal, otherwise than by the resurrection in the last day, except
Enoch and Elias, is a doctrine not apparent in Scripture. The whole of
the xivth chapter of _Job_, which is the speech not of his friends, but
of himself, is a complaint of this mortality of nature; and yet no
contradiction of the immortality at the resurrection. _There is hope of
a tree_, saith he, (verse 7) _if it be cast down. Though the root
thereof wax old, and the stock thereof die in the ground, yet when it
scenteth the water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant. But
man dieth and wasteth away, yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is
he?_ And (verse 12) _Man lieth down, and riseth not, till the heavens be
no more_. But when is it, that the heavens shall be no more? St. Peter
tells us, that it is at the general resurrection. For in his 2nd
_Epistle_, chap. iii. verse 7, he saith, _that the heavens and the earth
that are now, are reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and
perdition of ungodly men_, and (v. 12) _looking for, and hasting to the
coming of God, wherein the heavens shall be on fire and shall be
dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. Nevertheless,
we according to the promise look for new heavens, and a new earth,
wherein dwelleth righteousness._ Therefore where Job saith, _man riseth
not till the heavens be no more_; it is all one, as if he had said, the
immortal life, (and soul and life in the Scripture do usually signify
the same thing,) beginneth not in man, till the resurrection and day of
judgment; and hath for cause, not his specifical nature and generation,
but the promise. For St. Peter says, not _We look for new heavens and a
new earth, from nature_, but _from promise_.

Lastly, seeing it hath been already proved out of divers evident places
of Scripture, in chap. xxxv. of this book, that the kingdom of God is a
civil commonwealth, where God himself is sovereign, by virtue first of
the _old_, and since of the _new_ covenant, wherein he reigneth by his
vicar or lieutenant; the same places do therefore also prove, that after
the coming again of our Saviour in his majesty and glory, to reign
actually and eternally, the kingdom of God is to be on earth. But
because this doctrine, though proved out of places of Scripture not few
nor obscure, will appear to most men a novelty, I do but propound it;
maintaining nothing in this, or any other paradox of religion; but
attending the end of that dispute of the sword, concerning the
authority, not yet amongst my countrymen decided, by which all sorts of
doctrine are to be approved or rejected; and whose commands, both in
speech and writing, whatsoever be the opinions of private men, must by
all men, that mean to be protected by their laws, be obeyed. For the
points of doctrine concerning the kingdom of God, have so great
influence on the kingdom of man, as not to be determined, but by them,
that under God have the sovereign power.

[Sidenote: The place after judgment of those who were never in the
           kingdom of God, or having been in, are cast out.]

As the kingdom of God, and eternal life, so also God’s enemies, and
their torments after judgment, appear by the Scripture to have their
place on earth. The name of the place, where all men remain till the
resurrection, that were either buried, or swallowed up of the earth, is
usually called in Scripture, by words that signify _under ground_; which
the Latins read generally _infernus_, and _inferi_, and the Greek ἃδης,
that is to say, a place where men cannot see; and containeth as well the
grave, as any any other deeper place. But for the place of the damned
after the resurrection, it is not determined, neither in the Old nor New
Testament, by any note of situation; but only by the company: as that it
shall be, where such wicked men were, as God in former times, in
extraordinary and miraculous manner, had destroyed from off the face of
the earth: [Sidenote: Tartarus.] as for example, that they are _in
Inferno_, in _Tartarus_, or in the bottomless pit; because Corah,
Dathan, and Abiron, were swallowed up alive into the earth. Not that the
writers of the Scripture would have us believe, there could be in the
globe of the earth, which is not only finite, but also, compared to the
height of the stars, of no considerable magnitude, a pit without a
bottom, that is, a hole of infinite depth, such as the Greeks in their
_demonology_, (that is to say, in their doctrine concerning _demons_),
and after them the Romans, called _Tartarus_; of which Virgil (_Æn._ vi.
578, 579) says,

           Bis patet in præceps tantum, tenditque sub umbras,
           Quantus ad ætherium cœli suspectus Olympum:

for that is a thing the proportion of earth to heaven cannot bear: but
that we should believe them there, indefinitely, where those men are, on
whom God inflicted that exemplary punishment.

[Sidenote: The congregation of giants.]

Again, because those mighty men of the earth, that lived in the time of
Noah, before the flood, (which the Greeks call _heroes_, and the
Scripture _giants_, and both say were begotten by copulation of the
children of God with the children of men,) were for their wicked life
destroyed by the general deluge; the place of the damned, is therefore
also sometimes marked out, by the company of those deceased giants; as
_Proverbs_ xxi. 16, _The man that wandereth out of the way of
understanding, shall remain in the congregation of the giants_; and
_Job_ xxvi. 5, _Behold the giants groan under water, and they that dwell
with them_. Here the place of the damned is under the water. And
_Isaiah_ xiv. 9, _Hell is troubled how to meet thee_ (that is, the King
of Babylon) _and will displace the giants for thee_: and here again the
place of the damned, if the sense be literal, is to be under water.
[Sidenote: Lake of fire.] Thirdly, because the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah, by the extraordinary wrath of God, were consumed for their
wickedness with fire and brimstone, and together with them the country
about made a stinking bituminous lake: the place of the damned is
sometimes expressed by fire, and a fiery lake, as in the _Apocalypse_,
xxi. 8, _But the timorous, incredulous, and abominable, and murderers,
and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall
have their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone; which
is the second death_. So that it is manifest, that hell fire, which is
here expressed by metaphor from the real fire of Sodom, signifieth not
any certain kind or place of torment; but is to be taken indefinitely,
for destruction, as it is in _Rev._ xx. 14, where it is said, that
_death and hell were cast into the lake of fire_; that is to say, were
abolished and destroyed; as if after the day of judgment, there shall be
no more dying, nor no more going into hell; that is, no more going to
_Hades_, (from which word perhaps our word Hell is derived,) which is
the same with no more dying.

[Sidenote: Utter darkness.]

Fourthly, from the plague of darkness inflicted on the Egyptians, of
which it is written (_Exod._ x. 23) _They saw not one another, neither
rose any man from his place for three days; but all the children of
Israel had light in their dwellings_; the place of the wicked after
judgment, is called _utter darkness_, or, as it is in the original,
_darkness without_. And so it is expressed (_Matth._ xxii. 13) where the
king commanded his servants, _to bind hand and foot the man that had not
on his wedding garment, and to cast him out_, εἰς τὸ σκοτος τὸ ἐξώτερον,
_into external darkness_, or _darkness without_: which though translated
_utter darkness_, does not signify _how great_, but _where_ that
darkness is to be; namely, _without the habitation_ of God’s elect.

[Sidenote: Gehenna, and Tophet.]

Lastly, whereas there was a place near Jerusalem, called the _Valley of
the Children of Hinnon_; in a part whereof, called _Tophet_, the Jews
had committed most grievous idolatry, sacrificing their children to the
idol Moloch; and wherein also God had afflicted his enemies with most
grievous punishments; and wherein Josiah had burned the priests of
Moloch upon their own altars, as appeareth at large in the 2nd of
_Kings_, chap. xxiii.: the place served afterwards to receive the filth
and garbage which was carried thither out of the city; and there used to
be fires made from time to time, to purify the air, and take away the
stench of carrion. From this abominable place, the Jews used ever after
to call the place of the damned, by the name of _Gehenna_, or _Valley of
Hinnon_. And this _Gehenna_, is that word which is usually now
translated HELL; and from the fires from time to time there burning, we
have the notion of _everlasting_ and _unquenchable fire_.

[Sidenote: Of the literal sense of the Scripture concerning hell.]

Seeing now there is none, that so interprets the Scripture, as that
after the day of judgment, the wicked are all eternally to be punished
in the Valley of Hinnon; or that they shall so rise again, as to be ever
after under ground or under water; or that after the resurrection, they
shall no more see one another, nor stir from one place to another: it
followeth, methinks, very necessarily, that that which is thus said
concerning hell fire, is spoken metaphorically; and that therefore there
is a proper sense to be enquired after, (for of all metaphors there is
some real ground, that may be expressed in proper words,) both of the
_place_ of _hell_, and the nature of _hellish torments_, and
_tormenters_.

[Sidenote: Satan, Devil, not proper names, but appellatives.]

And first for the tormenters, we have their nature and properties,
exactly and properly delivered by the names of, _the Enemy_, or _Satan_;
_the Accuser_, or _Diabolus_; _the Destroyer_, or _Abaddon_. Which
significant names, _Satan_, _Devil_, _Abaddon_, set not forth to us any
individual person, as proper names use to do; but only an office, or
quality; and are therefore appellatives; which ought not to have been
left untranslated, as they are in the Latin and modern Bibles; because
thereby they seem to be proper names of _demons_; and men are the more
easily seduced to believe the doctrine of devils; which at that time was
the religion of the Gentiles, and contrary to that of Moses and of
Christ.

And because by the _Enemy_, the _Accuser_, and _Destroyer_, is meant the
enemy of them that shall be in the kingdom of God; therefore if the
kingdom of God after the resurrection, be upon the earth, as in the
former chapter I have shown by Scripture it seems to be, the Enemy and
his kingdom must be on earth also. For so also was it, in the time
before the Jews had deposed God. For God’s kingdom was in Palestine; and
the nations round about, were the kingdoms of the Enemy; and
consequently by _Satan_, is meant any earthly enemy of the Church.

[Sidenote: Torments of hell.]

The torments of hell, are expressed sometimes, by _weeping_, and
_gnashing of teeth_, as _Matth._ viii. 12. Sometimes by _the worm of
conscience_; as _Isaiah_ lxvi. 24, and _Mark_ ix. 44, 46, 48: sometimes,
by fire, as in the place now quoted, _where the worm dieth not, and the
fire is not quenched_, and many places beside: sometimes by _shame and
contempt_, as _Dan._ xii. 2, _And many of them that sleep in the dust of
the earth, shall awake; some to everlasting life; and some to shame, and
everlasting contempt_. All which places design metaphorically a grief
and discontent of mind, from the sight of that eternal felicity in
others, which they themselves through their own incredulity and
disobedience have lost. And because such felicity in others, is not
sensible but by comparison with their own actual miseries; it followeth
that they are to suffer such bodily pains, and calamities, as are
incident to those, who not only live under evil and cruel governors, but
have also for enemy the eternal king of the saints, God Almighty. And
amongst these bodily pains, is to be reckoned also to every one of the
wicked a second death. For though the Scripture be clear for an
universal resurrection; yet we do not read, that to any of the reprobate
is promised an eternal life. For whereas St. Paul (_1 Cor._ xv. 42, 43)
to the question concerning what bodies men shall rise with again, saith,
that _The body is sown in corruption, and is raised in incorruption; it
is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it
is raised in power_. Glory and power cannot be applied to the bodies of
the wicked: nor can the name of _second death_ be applied to those that
can never die but once: and although in metaphorical speech, a
calamitous life everlasting, may be called an everlasting death, yet it
cannot well be understood of a _second death_.

The fire prepared for the wicked, is an everlasting fire: that is to
say, the estate wherein no man can be without torture, both of body and
mind, after the resurrection, shall endure for ever; and in that sense
the fire shall be unquenchable, and the torments everlasting: but it
cannot thence be inferred, that he who shall be cast into that fire, or
be tormented with those torments, shall endure and resist them so as to
be eternally burnt, and tortured, and yet never be destroyed, nor die.
And though there be many places that affirm everlasting fire and
torments, into which men may be cast successively one after another as
long as the world lasts, yet I find none that affirm there shall be an
eternal life therein of any individual person; but to the contrary, an
everlasting death, which is the second death: (_Rev._ xx. 13, 14) _For
after death and the grave shall have delivered up the dead which were in
them, and every man be judged according to his works; death and the
grave shall also be cast into the lake of fire. This is the second
death._ Whereby it is evident that there is to be a second death of
every one that shall be condemned at the day of judgment, after which he
shall die no more.

[Sidenote: The joys of life eternal, and salvation, the same thing.]

[Sidenote: Salvation from sin, and from misery, all one.]

The joys of life eternal, are in Scripture comprehended all under the
name of SALVATION, or _being saved_. To be saved, is to be secured,
either respectively, against special evils, or absolutely, against all
evils, comprehending want, sickness, and death itself. And because man
was created in a condition immortal, not subject to corruption, and
consequently to nothing that tendeth to the dissolution of his nature;
and fell from that happiness by the sin of Adam; it followeth, that to
be _saved_ from sin, is to be saved from all the evil and calamities
that sin hath brought upon us. And therefore in the holy Scripture,
remission of sin, and salvation from death and misery, is the same
thing, as it appears by the words of our Saviour, who having cured a man
sick of the palsy, by saying, (_Matth._ ix. 2) _Son be of good cheer,
thy sins be forgiven thee_; and knowing that the Scribes took for
blasphemy, that a man should pretend to forgive sins, asked them (verse
5) _whether it were easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, or, Arise
and walk_; signifying thereby, that it was all one, as to the saving of
the sick, to say, _Thy sins are forgiven_, and _Arise and walk_; and
that he used that form of speech, only to shew he had power to forgive
sins. And it is besides evident in reason, that since death and misery
were the punishments of sin, the discharge of sin must also be a
discharge of death and misery; that is to say, salvation absolute, such
as the faithful are to enjoy after the day of judgment, by the power and
favour of Jesus Christ, who for that cause is called our SAVIOUR.

Concerning particular salvations, such as are understood, (_1 Sam._ xiv.
39) as the _Lord liveth that saveth Israel_, that is, from their
temporary enemies, and (_2 Sam._ xxii. 3) _Thou art my Saviour, thou
savest me from violence_; and, (_2 Kings_ xiii. 5) _God gave the
Israelites a Saviour, and so they were delivered from the hand of the
Assyrians_, and the like, I need say nothing; there being neither
difficulty, nor interest to corrupt the interpretation of texts of that
kind.

[Sidenote: The place of eternal salvation.]

But concerning the general salvation, because it must be in the kingdom
of heaven, there is great difficulty concerning the place. On one side,
by _kingdom_, which is an estate ordained by men for their perpetual
security against enemies and want, it seemeth that this salvation should
be on earth. For by salvation is set forth unto us, a glorious reign of
our king, by conquest; not a safety by escape: and therefore there where
we look for salvation, we must look also for triumph; and before
triumph, for victory; and before victory, for battle; which cannot well
be supposed, shall be in heaven. But how good soever this reason may be,
I will not trust to it, without very evident places of Scripture. The
state of salvation is described at large, _Isaiah_ xxxiii. 20, 21, 22,
23, 24:

_Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities; thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down;
not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any
of the cords thereof be broken._

_But there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers and
streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant
ship pass thereby._

_For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our law-giver, the Lord is our
king, he will save us._

_Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their mast;
they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil
divided; the lame take the prey:_

_And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick; the people that shall
dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity._

In which words we have the place from whence salvation is to proceed,
_Jerusalem, a quiet habitation_; the eternity of it, _a tabernacle that
shall not be taken down, &c_; the Saviour of it, _the Lord, their judge,
their law-giver, their king, he will save us; the salvation, the Lord
shall be to them as a broad moat of swift waters, &c_; the condition of
their enemies, _their tacklings are loose, their masts weak, the lame
shall take the spoil of them_; the condition of the saved, _the
inhabitant shall not say, I am sick_: and lastly, all this is
comprehended in forgiveness of sin, _the people that dwell therein shall
be forgiven their iniquity_. By which it is evident, that salvation
shall be on earth, then, when God shall reign, at the coming again of
Christ, in Jerusalem; and from Jerusalem shall proceed the salvation of
the Gentiles that shall be received into God’s kingdom: as is also more
expressly declared by the same prophet, (_Isaiah_ lxvi. 20, 21), _And
they_ (that is the Gentiles who had any Jew in bondage) _shall bring all
your brethren, for an offering to the Lord, out of all nations, upon
horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift
beasts, to my holy mountain, Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children
of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the
Lord. And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith
the Lord._ Whereby it is manifest, that the chief seat of God’s kingdom,
which is the place from whence the salvation of us that were Gentiles
shall proceed, shall be Jerusalem: and the same is also confirmed by our
Saviour in his discourse with the woman of Samaria, concerning the place
of God’s worship; to whom he saith (_John_ iv. 22) that the Samaritans
worshipped they knew not what, but the Jews worshipped what they knew,
_for salvation is of the Jews_ (_ex Judæis_, that is, begins at the
Jews): as if he should say, you worship God, but know not by whom he
will save you, as we do, that know it shall be by one of the tribe of
Judah; a Jew, not a Samaritan. And therefore also the woman not
impertinently answered him again, _We know the Messias shall come_. So
that which our Saviour saith, _Salvation is from the Jews_, is the same
that Paul says (_Rom._ i. 16, 17) _The Gospel is the power of God to
salvation to every one that believeth: to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith_; from the faith of the Jew to the faith of the Gentile. In the
like sense the prophet Joel describing the day of Judgment, (chap. ii.
30, 31) that God would _shew wonders in heaven, and in earth, blood, and
fire, and pillars of smoke; the sun shall be turned to darkness, and the
moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come_: he
addeth, (verse 32) _and it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. For in Mount Zion and in
Jerusalem shall be salvation._ And _Obadiah_, (verse 17) saith the same,
_Upon Mount Zion shall be deliverance; and there shall be holiness, and
the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions_, that is the
possessions of the _heathen_, which _possessions_, he expresseth more
particularly in the following verses, by the _mount of Esau_, the _Land
of the Philistines_, the _fields of Ephraim_, of _Samaria_, _Gilead_,
and the _cities of the south_, and concludes with these words, _the
kingdom shall be the Lord’s_. All these places are for salvation, and
the kingdom of God, after the day of judgment, upon earth. On the other
side, I have not found any text that can probably be drawn, to prove any
ascension of the saints into heaven; that is to say, into any _cœlum
empyreum_, or other ætherial region; saving that it is called the
kingdom of Heaven: which name it may have, because God, that was king of
the Jews, governed them by his commands, sent to Moses by angels from
heaven; and after the revolt, sent his Son from heaven to reduce them to
their obedience; and shall send him thence again to rule both them, and
all other faithful men, from the day of judgment, everlastingly: or from
that, that the throne of this our great king is in heaven; whereas the
earth is but his footstool. But that the subjects of God should have any
place as high as his throne, or higher than his footstool, it seemeth
not suitable to the dignity of a king, nor can I find any evident text
for it in Holy Scripture.

[Sidenote: The world to come.]

From this that hath been said of the kingdom of God, and of salvation,
it is not hard to interpret what is meant by the WORLD TO COME. There
are three worlds mentioned in Scripture, the _old world_, the _present
world_, and the _world to come_. Of the first, St. Peter speaks, (_2
Pet._ ii. 5) _If God spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth
person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing the flood upon the world
of the ungodly, &c._ So the _first world_, was from Adam to the general
flood. Of the present world, our Saviour speaks (_John_ xviii. 36) _My
kingdom is not of this world_. For he came only to teach men the way of
salvation, and to renew the kingdom of his Father, by his doctrine. Of
the world to come, St. Peter speaks (_2 Pet._ iii. 13) _Nevertheless we
according to his promise look for new heavens, and a new earth_. This is
that WORLD, wherein Christ coming down from heaven in the clouds, with
great power, and glory, shall send his angels, and shall gather together
his elect, from the four winds, and from the uttermost parts of the
earth, and thenceforth reign over them, under his Father, everlastingly.

[Sidenote: Redemption.]

_Salvation_ of a sinner, supposeth a precedent REDEMPTION; for he that
is once guilty of sin, is obnoxious to the penalty of the same; and must
pay, or some other for him, such ransom as he that is offended, and has
him in his power, shall require. And seeing the person offended, is
Almighty God, in whose power are all things; such ransom is to be paid
before salvation can be acquired, as God hath been pleased to require.
By this ransom, is not intended a satisfaction for sin, equivalent to
the offence; which no sinner for himself, nor righteous man can ever be
able to make for another: the damage a man does to another, he may make
amends for by restitution or recompense; but sin cannot be taken away by
recompense; for that were to make the liberty to sin, a thing vendible.
But sins may be pardoned to the repentant, either _gratis_, or upon such
penalty as God is pleased to accept. That which God usually accepted in
the Old Testament, was some sacrifice or oblation. To forgive sin is not
an act of injustice, though the punishment have been threatened. Even
amongst men, though the promise of good, bind the promiser; yet threats,
that is to say, promises of evil, bind them not; much less shall they
bind God, who is infinitely more merciful than men. Our Saviour Christ
therefore to _redeem_ us, did not in that sense satisfy for the sins of
men, as that his death, of its own virtue, could make it unjust in God
to punish sinners with eternal death; but did make that sacrifice and
oblation of himself, at his first coming, which God was pleased to
require for the salvation, at his second coming, of such as in the
meantime should repent, and believe in him. And though this act of our
_redemption_, be not always in Scripture called a _sacrifice_, and
_oblation_, but sometimes a _price_; yet by _price_ we are not to
understand anything, by the value whereof, he could claim right to a
pardon for us, from his offended Father; but that price which God the
Father was pleased in mercy to demand.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XXXIX.

                  OF THE SIGNIFICATION IN SCRIPTURE OF
                            THE WORD CHURCH.


[Sidenote: Church the Lord’s house.]

The word Church, (_Ecclesia_) signifieth in the books of Holy Scripture
divers things. Sometimes, though not often, it is taken for _God’s
house_, that is to say, for a temple, wherein Christians assembled to
perform holy duties, publicly, as (_1 Cor._ xiv. 34) _Let your women
keep silence in the Churches_: but this is metaphorically put for the
congregation there assembled; and hath been since used for the edifice
itself, to distinguish between the temples of Christians and idolaters.
The Temple of Jerusalem was _God’s house_, and the house of prayer; and
so is any edifice dedicated by Christians to the worship of Christ,
_Christ’s house_: and therefore the Greek fathers call it Κυριακὴ, _the
Lord’s house_: and thence in our language it came to be called _kyrke_,
and _church_.

[Sidenote: _Ecclesia_, properly what.]

Church, when not taken for a house, signifieth the same that _ecclesia_
signified in the Grecian commonwealth, that is to say, a congregation,
or an assembly of citizens, called forth to hear the magistrate speak
unto them; and which in the commonwealth of Rome was called _concio_: as
he that spake was called _ecclesiastes_, and _concionator_. And when
they were called forth by lawful authority, (_Acts_ xix. 39) it was
_Ecclesia legitima_, a _lawful Church_, ἔννομος ἐκκλησία. But when they
were excited by tumultuous and seditious clamour, then it was a Confused
Church, ἐκκλησία συγκεχυμένη.

It is taken also sometimes for the men that have right to be of the
congregation, though not actually assembled, that is to say, for the
whole multitude of Christian men, how far soever they be dispersed: as
(_Acts_ viii. 3) where it is said, that _Saul made havoc of the Church_:
and in this sense is Christ said to be the head of the Church. And
sometimes for a certain part of Christians, as (_Col._ iv. 15) _Salute
the Church that is in his house_. Sometimes also for the elect only; as
(_Eph._ v. 27) _A glorious Church, without spot, or wrinkle, holy, and
without blemish_; which is meant of the _Church triumphant_, or _Church
to come_. Sometimes, for a congregation assembled of professors of
Christianity, whether their profession be true or counterfeit; as it is
understood, (_Matth._ xviii. 17) where it is said, _Tell it to the
Church; and if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee as a
Gentile, or publican_.

[Sidenote: In what sense the church is one person.]

[Sidenote: Church defined.]

And in this last sense only it is that the _Church_ can be taken for one
person; that is to say, that it can be said to have power to will, to
pronounce, to command, to be obeyed, to make laws, or to do any other
action whatsoever. For without authority from a lawful congregation,
whatsoever act be done in a concourse of people, it is the particular
act of every one of those that were present, and gave their aid to the
performance of it; and not the act of them all in gross, as of one body;
much less the act of them that were absent, or that being present, were
not willing it should be done. According to this sense, I define a
CHURCH to be, _a company of men professing Christian religion, united in
the person of one sovereign, at whose command they ought to assemble,
and without whose authority they ought not to assemble_. And because in
all commonwealths, that assembly, which is without warrant from the
civil sovereign, is unlawful; that Church also, which is assembled in
any commonwealth that hath forbidden them to assemble, is an unlawful
assembly.

[Sidenote: A Christian commonwealth and a church all one.]

It followeth also, that there is on earth, no such universal Church, as
all Christians are bound to obey; because there is no power on earth, to
which all other commonwealths are subject. There are Christians, in the
dominions of several princes and states; but every one of them is
subject to that commonwealth, whereof he is himself a member; and
consequently, cannot be subject to the commands of any other person. And
therefore a Church, such a one as is capable to command, to judge,
absolve, condemn, or do any other act, is the same thing with a civil
commonwealth, consisting of Christian men; and is called a _civil
state_, for that the subjects of it are _men_; and a _Church_, for that
the subjects thereof are _Christians_. _Temporal_ and _spiritual_
government, are but two words brought into the world, to make men see
double, and mistake their _lawful sovereign_. It is true, that the
bodies of the faithful, after the resurrection, shall be not only
spiritual, but eternal; but in this life they are gross, and
corruptible. There is therefore no other government in this life,
neither of state, nor religion, but temporal; nor teaching of any
doctrine, lawful to any subject, which the governor both of the state,
and of the religion forbiddeth to be taught. And that governor must be
one; or else there must needs follow faction and civil war in the
commonwealth, between the _Church_ and _State_; between _spiritualists_
and _temporalists_; between the _sword of justice_, and the _shield of
faith_: and, which is more, in every Christian man’s own breast, between
the _Christian_, and the _man_. The doctors of the Church, are called
pastors; so also are civil sovereigns. But if pastors be not subordinate
one to another, so as that there may be one chief pastor, men will be
taught contrary doctrines; whereof both may be, and one must be false.
Who that one chief pastor is, according to the law of nature, hath been
already shown; namely, that it is the civil sovereign: and to whom the
Scripture hath assigned that office, we shall see in the chapters
following.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XL.

                OF THE RIGHTS OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD, IN
                 ABRAHAM, MOSES, THE HIGH-PRIESTS, AND
                          THE KINGS OF JUDAH.



[Sidenote: The sovereign right of Abraham.]

The father of the faithful, and first in the kingdom of God by covenant,
was Abraham. For with him was the covenant first made; wherein he
obliged himself, and his seed after him, to acknowledge and obey the
commands of God; not only such, as he could take notice of, (as moral
laws,) by the light of nature; but also such, as God should in special
manner deliver to him by dreams and visions. For as to the moral law,
they were already obliged, and needed not have been contracted withal,
by promise of the land of Canaan. Nor was there any contract, that could
add to, or strengthen the obligation, by which both they, and all men
else were bound naturally to obey God Almighty: and therefore the
covenant which Abraham made with God, was to take for the commandment of
God, that which in the name of God was commanded him in a dream, or
vision; and to deliver it to his family, and cause them to observe the
same.

[Sidenote: Abraham had the sole power of ordering the religion of his
           own people.]

In this contract of God with Abraham, we may observe three points of
important consequence in the government of God’s people. First, that at
the making of this covenant, God spake only to Abraham; and therefore
contracted not with any of his family, or seed, otherwise than as their
wills, which make the essence of all covenants, were before the contract
involved in the will of Abraham; who was therefore supposed to have had
a lawful power, to make them perform all that he covenanted for them.
According whereunto (_Gen._ xviii. 18, 19) God saith, _All the nations
of the earth shall be blessed in him; for I know him that he will
command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep
the way of the Lord_. From whence may be concluded this first point,
that they to whom God hath not spoken immediately, are to receive the
positive commandments of God, from their sovereign; as the family and
seed of Abraham did from Abraham their father, and Lord, and civil
sovereign. And consequently in every commonwealth, they who have no
supernatural revelation to the contrary, ought to obey the laws of their
own sovereign, in the external acts and profession of religion. As for
the inward _thought_, and _belief_ of men, which human governors can
take no notice of, (for God only knoweth the heart), they are not
voluntary, nor the effect of the laws, but of the unrevealed will and of
the power of God; and consequently fall not under obligation.

[Sidenote: No pretence of private spirit against the religion of
           Abraham.]

From whence proceedeth another point, that it was not unlawful for
Abraham, when any of his subjects should pretend private vision or
spirit, or other revelation from God, for the countenancing of any
doctrine which Abraham should forbid, or when they followed or adhered
to any such pretender, to punish them; and consequently that it is
lawful now for the sovereign to punish any man that shall oppose his
private spirit against the laws: for he hath the same place in the
commonwealth, that Abraham had in his own family.

[Sidenote: Abraham sole judge and interpreter of what God spake.]

There ariseth also from the same, a third point; that as none but
Abraham in his family, so none but the sovereign in a Christian
commonwealth, can take notice what is, or what is not the word of God.
For God spake only to Abraham; and it was he only, that was able to know
what God said, and to interpret the same to his family: and therefore
also, they that have the place of Abraham in a commonwealth, are the
only interpreters of what God hath spoken.

[Sidenote: The authority of Moses whereon grounded.]

The same covenant was renewed with Isaac; and afterwards with Jacob; but
afterwards no more, till the Israelites were freed from the Egyptians,
and arrived at the foot of Mount Sinai: and then it was renewed by
Moses, (as I have said before, chap. xxxv.) in such manner, as they
became from that time forward the peculiar kingdom of God; whose
lieutenant was Moses, for his own time: and the succession to that
office was settled upon Aaron, and his heirs after him, to be to God a a
sacerdotal kingdom for ever.

By this constitution, a kingdom is acquired to God. But seeing Moses had
no authority to govern the Israelites, as a successor to the right of
Abraham, because he could not claim it by inheritance; it appeareth not
as yet, that the people were obliged to take him for God’s lieutenant,
longer than they believed that God spake unto him. And therefore his
authority, notwithstanding the covenant they made with God, depended yet
merely upon the opinion they had of his sanctity, and of the reality of
his conferences with God, and the verity of his miracles; which opinion
coming to change, they were no more obliged to take anything for the law
of God, which he propounded to them in God’s name. We are therefore to
consider, what other ground there was, of their obligation to obey him.
For it could not be the commandment of God that could oblige them;
because God spake not to them immediately, but by the mediation of Moses
himself: and our Saviour saith of himself, (_John_ v. 31) _If I bear
witness of myself, my witness is not true_; much less if Moses bear
witness of himself, especially in a claim of kingly power over God’s
people, ought his testimony to be received. His authority therefore, as
the authority of all other princes, must be grounded on the consent of
the people, and their promise to obey him. And so it was: for _the
people_ (_Exod._ xx. 18, 19) _when they saw the thunderings, and the
lightenings, and the noise of the trumpets, and the mountain smoking,
removed, and stood afar off. And they said unto Moses, speak thou with
us, and we will hear, but let not God speak with us lest we die._ Here
was their promise of obedience; and by this it was they obliged
themselves to obey whatsoever he should deliver unto them for the
commandment of God.

[Sidenote: Moses was, under God, sovereign of the Jews all his own time,
           though Aaron had the priesthood.]

And notwithstanding the covenant constituted a sacerdotal kingdom, that
is to say, a kingdom hereditary to Aaron; yet that is to be understood
of the succession after Moses should be dead. For whosoever ordereth and
establisheth the policy, as first founder of a commonwealth, be it
monarchy, aristocracy, or democracy, must needs have sovereign power
over the people all the while he is doing of it. And that Moses had that
power all his own time, is evidently affirmed in the Scripture. First,
in the text last before cited, because the people promised obedience,
not to Aaron, but to him. Secondly, (_Exod._ xxiv. 1, 2) _And God said
unto Moses, Come up unto the Lord, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and
seventy of the Elders of Israel. And Moses alone shall come near the
Lord, but they shall not come nigh, neither shall the people go up with
him._ By which it is plain, that Moses, who was alone called up to God,
(and not Aaron, nor the other priests, nor the seventy elders, nor the
people who were forbidden to come up,) was alone he, that represented to
the Israelites the person of God, that is to say, was their sole
sovereign under God. And though afterwards it be said (verses 9, 10)
_Then went up Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the
elders of Israel, and they saw the God of Israel, and there was under
his feet, as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone &c_; yet this was
not till after Moses had been with God before, and had brought to the
people the words which God had said to him. He only went for the
business of the people; the others, as the nobles of his retinue, were
admitted for honour to that special grace, which was not allowed to the
people; which was, as in the verse after appeareth, to see God and live,
_God laid not his hand upon them, they saw God and did eat and drink_,
that is, did live: but did not carry any commandment from him to the
people. Again, it is everywhere said, _the Lord spake unto Moses_, as in
all other occasions of government, so also in the ordering of the
ceremonies of religion, contained in chapters xxv. xxvi. xxvii. xxviii.
xxix. xxx. and xxxi. of _Exodus_, and throughout _Leviticus_: to Aaron
seldom. The calf that Aaron made, Moses threw into the fire. Lastly, the
question of the authority of Aaron, by occasion of his and Miriam’s
mutiny against Moses, was (_Numb._ xii.) judged by God himself for
Moses. So also in the question between Moses and the people, who had the
right of governing the people, when Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and two
hundred and fifty princes of the assembly, _gathered themselves
together_ (_Numb._ xvi. 3) _against Moses, and against Aaron, and said
unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are
holy, every one of them, and the Lord is amongst them, why lift you up
yourselves above the congregation of the Lord?_ God caused the earth to
swallow Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with their wives and children, alive,
and consumed those two hundred and fifty princes with fire. Therefore
neither Aaron, nor the people, nor any aristocracy of the chief princes
of the people, but Moses alone had next under God the sovereignty over
the Israelites: and that not only in causes of civil policy, but also of
religion: for Moses only spake with God, and therefore only could tell
the people what it was that God required at their hands. No man upon
pain of death might be so presumptuous as to approach the mountain where
God talked with Moses. _Thou shalt set bounds_ (saith the Lord, _Exod._
xix. 12) _to the people round about, and say, Take heed to yourselves
that you go not up into the Mount, or touch the border of it; whosoever
toucheth the Mount shall surely be put to death_. And again (verse 21)
_Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the Lord to
gaze_. Out of which we may conclude, that whosoever in a Christian
commonwealth holdeth the place of Moses, is the sole messenger of God,
and interpreter of his commandments. And according hereunto, no man
ought in the interpretation of the Scripture to proceed further than the
bounds which are set by their several sovereigns. For the Scriptures,
since God now speaketh in them, are the Mount Sinai; the bounds whereof
are the laws of them that represent God’s person on earth. To look upon
them, and therein to behold the wondrous works of God, and learn to fear
him, is allowed; but to interpret them, that is, to pry into what God
saith to him whom he appointeth to govern under him, and make themselves
judges whether he govern as God commandeth him, or not, is to transgress
the bounds God hath set us, and to gaze upon God irreverently.

[Sidenote: All spirits were subordinate to the spirit of Moses.]

There was no prophet in the time of Moses, nor pretender to the spirit
of God, but such as Moses had approved and authorized. For there were in
his time but seventy men, that are said to prophecy by the spirit of
God, and these were all of Moses his election; concerning whom God said
to Moses, (_Numb._ xi. 16) _Gather to me seventy of the elders of
Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people_. To these God
imparted his spirit; but it was not a different spirit from that of
Moses; for it is said (verse 25) _God came down in a cloud, and took of
the spirit that was upon Moses, and gave it to the seventy elders_. But
as I have shown before (chap. XXXVI.) by _spirit_, is understood the
_mind_; so that the sense of the place is no other than this, that God
endued them with a mind conformable and subordinate to that of Moses,
that they might prophecy, that is to say, speak to the people in God’s
name, in such manner, as to set forward, as ministers of Moses and by
his authority, such doctrine as was agreeable to Moses his doctrine. For
they were but ministers; and when two of them prophecied in the camp, it
was thought a new and unlawful thing; and as it is in verses 27 and 28
of the same chapter, they were accused of it, and Joshua advised Moses
to forbid them, as not knowing that it was by Moses his spirit that they
prophecied. By which it is manifest, that no subject ought to pretend to
prophecy, or to the spirit, in opposition to the doctrine established by
him whom God hath set in the place of Moses.

[Sidenote: After Moses the sovereignty was in the high priest.]

Aaron being dead, and after him also Moses, the kingdom, as being a
sacerdotal kingdom, descended by virtue of the covenant, to Aaron’s son
Eleazar the high-priest: and God declared him, next under himself, for
sovereign, at the same time that he appointed Joshua for the General of
their army. For thus God saith expressly (_Numb._ xxvii. 21) concerning
Joshua: _He shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall ask counsel
for him before the Lord; at his word shall they go out, and at his word
they shall come in, both he, and all the children of Israel with him_.
Therefore the supreme power of making war and peace, was in the priest.
The supreme power of judicature belonged also to the high-priest: for
the book of the law was in their keeping; and the priests and Levites
only were the subordinate judges in causes civil, as appears in _Deut._
xvii. 8, 9, 10. And for the manner of God’s worship, there was never
doubt made, but that the high-priest till the time of Saul, had the
supreme authority. Therefore the civil and ecclesiastical power were
both joined together in one and the same person, the high-priest; and
ought to be so, in whosoever governeth by divine right, that is, by
authority immediate from God.

[Sidenote: Of the sovereign power between the time of Joshua and of
           Saul.]

After the death of Joshua, till the time of Saul, the time between is
noted frequently in the Book of _Judges_, _That there was in those days
no king in Israel_; and sometimes with this addition, that _every man
did that which was right in his own eyes_. By which is to be understood,
that where it is said, _there was no king_, is meant, _there was no
sovereign power_ in Israel. And so it was, if we consider the act and
exercise of such power. For after the death of Joshua and Eleazar,
_there arose another generation_ (_Judges_ ii. 10, 11) _that knew not
the Lord, nor the works which he had done for Israel, but did evil in
the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim_. And the Jews had that quality
which St. Paul noteth, _to look for a sign_, not only before they would
submit themselves to the government of Moses, but also after they had
obliged themselves by their submission. Whereas signs and miracles had
for end to procure faith, not to keep men from violating it, when they
have once given it; for to that men are obliged by the law of nature.
But if we consider not the exercise, but the right of governing, the
sovereign power was still in the high-priest. Therefore whatsoever
obedience was yielded to any of the judges, who were men chosen by God
extraordinarily to save his rebellious subjects out of the hands of the
enemy, it cannot be drawn into argument against the right the
high-priest had to the sovereign power, in all matters both of policy
and religion. And neither the judges nor Samuel himself had an ordinary,
but an extraordinary calling to the government; and were obeyed by the
Israelites, not out of duty, but out of reverence to their favour with
God, appearing in their wisdom, courage, or felicity. Hitherto therefore
the right of regulating both the policy, and the religion, were
inseparable.

[Sidenote: Of the rights of the kings of Israel.]

To the judges succeeded kings: and whereas before, all authority, both
in religion and policy, was in the high-priest; so now it was all in the
king. For the sovereignty over the people, which was before, not only by
virtue of the divine power, but also by a particular pact of the
Israelites, in God, and next under him, in the high-priest, as his
vicegerent on earth, was cast off by the people, with the consent of God
himself. For when they said to Samuel (_1 Sam._ viii. 5) _Make us a king
to judge us like all the nations_, they signified that they would no
more be governed by the commands that should be laid upon them by the
priest, in the name of God; but by one that should command them in the
same manner that all other nations were commanded; and consequently in
deposing the high-priest of royal authority, they deposed that peculiar
government of God. And yet God consented to it, saying to Samuel (_1
Sam._ viii. 7) _Hearken unto the voice of the people, in all that they
shall say unto thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected me, that I should not reign over them_. Having therefore
rejected God, in whose right the priests governed, there was no
authority left to the priests, but such as the king was pleased to allow
them; which was more or less, according as the kings were good or evil.
And for the government of civil affairs, it is manifest, it was all in
the hands of the king. For in the same chapter, (verse 20), they say
_they will be like all the nations; that their king shall be their
judge, and go before them, and fight their battles_; that is, he shall
have the whole authority, both in peace and war. In which is contained
also the ordering of religion: for there was no other word of God in
that time, by which to regulate religion, but the law of Moses, which
was their civil law. Besides, we read (_1 Kings_ ii. 27) that _Solomon
thrust out Abiathar from being priest before the Lord_: he had therefore
authority over the high-priest, as over any other subject; which is a
great mark of supremacy in religion. And we read also, (_1 Kings_ viii.)
that he dedicated the Temple; that he blessed the people; and that he
himself in person made that excellent prayer, used in the consecration
of all churches and houses of prayer; which is another great mark of
supremacy in religion. Again, we read (_2 Kings_ xxii.) that when there
was question concerning the Book of the Law found in the Temple, the
same was not decided by the high-priest, but Josiah sent both him and
others to enquire concerning it, of Huldah, the prophetess; which is
another mark of supremacy in religion. Lastly, we read (_1 Chron._ xxvi.
30) that David made Hashabiah and his brethren, Hebronites, officers of
Israel among them westward, _in all their business of the Lord, and in
the service of the king_. Likewise (verse 32) that he made other
Hebronites, _rulers over the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half tribe
of Manasseh_ (these were the rest of Israel that dwelt beyond Jordan)
_for every matter pertaining to God, and affairs of the king_. Is not
this full power, both _temporal_ and _spiritual_, as they call it that
would divide it? To conclude; from the first institution of God’s
kingdom, to the captivity, the supremacy of religion was in the same
hand with that of the civil sovereignty; and the priest’s office after
the election of Saul, was not magisterial, but ministerial.

[Sidenote: The practice of supremacy in religion was not, in the time of
           the kings, according to the right thereof.]

Notwithstanding the government both in policy and religion, were joined,
first in the high-priests, and afterwards in the kings, so far forth as
concerned the right; yet it appeareth by the same holy history, that the
people understood it not: but there being amongst them a great part, and
probably the greatest part, that no longer than they saw great miracles,
or, what is equivalent to a miracle, great abilities, or great felicity
in the enterprises of their governors, gave sufficient credit either to
the fame of Moses or to the colloquies between God and the priests; they
took occasion, as oft as their governors displeased them, by blaming
sometimes the policy, sometimes the religion, to change the government
or revolt from their obedience at their pleasure: and from thence
proceeded from time to time the civil troubles, divisions, and
calamities of the nation. As for example, after the death of Eleazar and
Joshua, the next generation which had not seen the wonders of God, but
were left to their own weak reason, not knowing themselves obliged by
the covenant of a sacerdotal kingdom, regarded no more the commandment
of the priest nor any law of Moses, but did every man that which was
right in his own eyes, and obeyed in civil affairs such men, as from
time to time they thought able to deliver them from the neighbour
nations that oppressed them; and consulted not with God, as they ought
to do, but with such men or women, as they guessed to be prophets by
their predictions of things to come; and though they had an idol in
their chapel, yet if they had a Levite for their chaplain, they made
account they worshipped the God of Israel.

And afterwards when they demanded a king after the manner of the
nations; yet it was not with a design to depart from the worship of God
their king; but despairing of the justice of the sons of Samuel, they
would have a king to judge them in civil actions; but not that they
would allow their king to change the religion which they thought was
recommended to them by Moses. So that they always kept in store a
pretext, either of justice or religion, to discharge themselves of their
obedience, whensoever they had hope to prevail. Samuel was displeased
with the people, for that they desired a king; for God was their king
already, and Samuel had but an authority under him; yet did Samuel, when
Saul observed not his counsel, in destroying Agag as God had commanded,
anoint another king, namely David, to take the succession from his
heirs. Rehoboam was no idolater; but when the people thought him an
oppressor, that civil pretence carried from him ten tribes to Jeroboam
an idolater. And generally through the whole history of the kings, as
well of Judah as of Israel, there were prophets that always controlled
the kings, for transgressing the religion; and sometimes also for errors
of state; as Jehosaphat was reproved (_2 Chron._ xix. 2) by the prophet
Jehu, for aiding the king of Israel against the Syrians; and Hezekiah,
by Isaiah, (xxxix. 3-7) for shewing his treasures to the ambassadors of
Babylon. By all which it appeareth, that though the power both of state
and religion were in the kings; yet none of them were uncontrolled in
the use of it, but such as were gracious for their own natural abilities
or felicities. So that from the practise of those times, there can no
argument be drawn, that the right of supremacy in religion was not in
the kings, unless we place it in the prophets, and conclude, that
because Hezekiah praying to the Lord before the cherubims, was not
answered from thence, nor then, but afterwards by the prophet Isaiah,
therefore Isaiah was supreme head of the church; or because Josiah
consulted Huldah the prophetess, concerning the Book of the Law, that
therefore neither he nor the high-priest, but Huldah the prophetess, had
the supreme authority in matter of religion; which I think is not the
opinion of any doctor.

[Sidenote: After the captivity, the Jews had no settled commonwealth.]

During the captivity, the Jews had no commonwealth at all: and after
their return, though they renewed their covenant with God, yet there was
no promise made of obedience, neither to Esdras, nor to any other: and
presently after, they became subjects to the Greeks, from whose customs
and demonology, and from the doctrine of the Cabalists, their religion
became much corrupted: in such sort as nothing can be gathered from
their confusion, both in state and religion, concerning the supremacy in
either. And therefore so far forth as concerneth the Old Testament, we
may conclude, that whosoever had the sovereignty of the commonwealth
amongst the Jews, the same had also the supreme authority in matter of
God’s external worship, and represented God’s person; that is, the
person of God the Father; though he were not called by the name of
Father, till such time as he sent into the world his son Jesus Christ,
to redeem mankind from their sins, and bring them into his everlasting
kingdom, to be saved for evermore. Of which we are to speak in the
chapter following.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XLI.

                 OF THE OFFICE OF OUR BLESSED SAVIOUR.


[Sidenote: Three parts of the office of Christ.]

We find in Holy Scripture three parts of the office of the Messiah: the
first of a _Redeemer_ or _Saviour_; the second of a _pastor_,
_counsellor_, or _teacher_, that is, of a prophet sent from God to
convert such as God hath elected to salvation: the third of a _king_, an
_eternal king_, but under his Father, as Moses and the high-priests were
in their several times. And to these three parts are correspondent three
times. For our redemption he wrought at his first coming, by the
sacrifice wherein he offered up himself for our sins upon the cross: our
conversion he wrought partly then in his own person, and partly worketh
now by his ministers, and will continue to work till his coming again.
And after his coming again, shall begin that his glorious reign over his
elect, which is to last eternally.

[Sidenote: His office as a Redeemer.]

To the office of a Redeemer, that is, of one that payeth the ransom of
sin, which ransom is death, it appertaineth, that he was sacrificed, and
thereby bare upon his own head and carried away from us our iniquities,
in such sort as God had required. Not that the death of one man, though
without sin, can satisfy for the offences of all men, in the rigour of
justice, but in the mercy of God, that ordained such sacrifices for sin,
as he was pleased in his mercy to accept. In the old law (as we may
read, _Levit._ xvi.) the Lord required that there should, every year
once, be made an atonement for the sins of all Israel, both priests and
others; for the doing whereof, Aaron alone was to sacrifice for himself
and the priests a young bullock; and for the rest of the people, he was
to receive from them two young goats, of which he was to _sacrifice_
one; but as for the other, which was the _scape-goat_, he was to lay his
hands on the head thereof, and by a confession of the iniquities of the
people, to lay them all on that head, and then by some opportune man, to
cause the goat to be led into the wilderness, and there to _escape_, and
carry away with him the iniquities of the people. As the sacrifice of
the one goat was a sufficient, because an acceptable, price for the
ransom of all Israel; so the death of the Messiah, is a sufficient price
for the sins of all mankind, because there was no more required. Our
Saviour Christ’s sufferings seem to be here figured, as clearly as in
the oblation of Isaac, or in any other type of him in the Old Testament.
He was both the sacrificed goat, and the scapegoat; _he was oppressed,
and he was afflicted_ (_Isaiah_ liii. 7); _he opened not his mouth; he
is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep is dumb before the
shearer, so he opened not his mouth_: here he is the _sacrificed goat_.
_He hath borne our griefs_ (verse 4), _and carried our sorrows_: and
again, (verse 6), _the Lord hath laid upon him the iniquities of us
all_: and so he is the _scape-goat_. _He was cut off from the land of
the living_ (ver. 8) _for the transgression of my people_: there again
he is the _sacrificed goat_. And again, (verse 11) _he shall bear their
sins_: he is the _scape goat_. Thus is the lamb of God equivalent to
both those goats; sacrificed, in that he died; and escaping, in his
resurrection; being raised opportunely by his Father, and removed from
the habitation of men in his ascension.

[Sidenote: Christ’s kingdom not of this world.]

For as much therefore, as he that _redeemeth_ hath no title to the
_thing redeemed_, before _the redemption_, and ransom paid; and this
ransom was the death of the Redeemer; it is manifest, that our Saviour,
as man, was not king of those that he redeemed, before he suffered
death; that is, during that time he conversed bodily on the earth. I
say, he was not then king in present, by virtue of the pact, which the
faithful make with him in baptism. Nevertheless, by the renewing of
their pact with God in baptism, they were obliged to obey him for king,
under his Father, whensoever he should be pleased to take the kingdom
upon him. According whereunto, our Saviour himself expressly saith,
(_John_ xviii. 36) _My kingdom is not of this world_. Now seeing the
Scripture maketh mention but of two worlds; this that is now, and shall
remain unto the day of judgment, which is therefore also called the
_last day_; and that which shall be after the day of judgment, when
there shall be a new heaven, and a new earth: the kingdom of Christ is
not to begin till the general resurrection. And that is it which our
Saviour saith, (_Matth._ xvi. 27) _The Son of man shall come in the
glory of his Father, with his angels; and then he shall reward every man
according to his works_. To reward every man according to his works, is
to execute the office of a king; and this is not to be till he come in
the glory of his Father, with his angels. When our Saviour saith,
(_Matth._ xxiii. 2, 3) _The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat;
all therefore whatsoever they bid you do, that observe and do_; he
declared plainly, that he ascribed kingly power, for that time, not to
himself, but to them. And so he doth also, where he saith (_Luke_ xii.
14) _Who made me a judge or divider over you?_ And (_John_ xii. 47) _I
came not to judge the world, but to save the world_. And yet our Saviour
came into this world that he might be a king and a judge in the world to
come: for he was the Messiah, that is, the Christ, that is, the anointed
priest, and the sovereign prophet of God; that is to say, he was to have
all the power that was in Moses the prophet, in the high-priests that
succeeded Moses, and in the kings that succeeded the priests. And St.
John says expressly (chap. v. verse 22) _the Father judgeth no man, but
hath committed all judgment to the Son_. And this is not repugnant to
that other place, _I came not to judge the world_: for this is spoken of
the world present, the other of the world to come; as also where it is
said, that at the second coming of Christ, (_Matth._ xix. 28) _Ye that
have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in
the throne of his glory, ye shall also sit on twelve thrones, judging
the twelve tribes of Israel_.

[Sidenote: The end of Christ’s coming was to renew the covenant of the
           kingdom of God, and to persuade the elect to embrace it,
           which was the second part of his office.]

If then Christ, whilst he was on earth, had no kingdom in this world, to
what end was his first coming? It was to restore unto God, by a new
covenant, the kingdom, which being his by the old covenant, had been cut
off by the rebellion of the Israelites in the election of Saul. Which to
do, he was to preach unto them, that he was the _Messiah_, that is, the
king promised to them by the prophets; and to offer himself in sacrifice
for the sins of them that should by faith submit themselves thereto; and
in case the nation generally should refuse him, to call to his obedience
such as should believe in him amongst the Gentiles. So that there are
two parts of our Saviour’s office during his abode upon the earth: one
to proclaim himself the Christ; and another by teaching, and by working
of miracles, to persuade and prepare men to live so, as to be worthy of
the immortality believers were to enjoy, at such time as he should come
in majesty to take possession of his Father’s kingdom. And therefore it
is, that the time of his preaching is often by himself called the
_regeneration_; which is not properly a kingdom, and thereby a warrant
to deny obedience to the magistrates that then were; for he commanded to
obey those that sat then in Moses’ chair, and to pay tribute to Cæsar;
but only an earnest of the kingdom of God that was to come, to those to
whom God had given the grace to be his disciples, and to believe in him;
for which cause the godly are said to be already in the _kingdom of
grace_, as naturalized in that heavenly kingdom.

[Sidenote: The preaching of Christ not contrary to the then law of the
           Jews, nor of Cæsar.]

Hitherto, therefore, there is nothing done or taught by Christ, that
tendeth to the diminution of the civil right of the Jews or of Cæsar.
For as touching the commonwealth which then was amongst the Jews, both
they that bare rule amongst them, and they that were governed, did all
expect the Messiah and kingdom of God; which they could not have done,
if their laws had forbidden him, when he came, to manifest and declare
himself. Seeing therefore he did nothing, but by preaching and miracles
go about to prove himself to be that Messiah, he did therein nothing
against their laws. The kingdom he claimed was to be in another world:
he taught all men to obey in the mean time them that sat in Moses’ seat:
he allowed them to give Cæsar his tribute, and refused to take upon
himself to be a judge. How then could his words or actions be seditious,
or tend to the overthrow of their then civil government? But God having
determined his sacrifice for the reduction of his elect to their former
covenanted obedience, for the means, whereby he would bring the same to
effect, made use of their malice and ingratitude. Nor was it contrary to
the laws of Cæsar. For though Pilate himself, to gratify the Jews,
delivered him to be crucified; yet before he did so, he pronounced
openly, that he found no fault in him: and put for title of his
condemnation, not as the Jews required, _that he pretended to be king_;
but simply, _that he was king of the Jews_; and notwithstanding their
clamour, refused to alter it; saying, _What I have written, I have
written_.

[Sidenote: The third part of his office was to be king, under his
           Father, of the elect.]

As for the third part of his office, which was to be _king_, I have
already shewn that his kingdom was not to begin till the resurrection.
But then he shall be king, not only as God, in which sense he is king
already, and ever shall be, of all the earth, in virtue of his
omnipotence; but also peculiarly of his own elect, by virtue of the pact
they make with him in their baptism. And therefore it is, that our
Saviour saith (_Matth._ xix. 28) that his apostles should sit upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel, _When the Son of
Man shall sit in the throne of his glory_: whereby he signified that he
should reign then in his human nature; and (_Matth._ xvi. 27) _The Son
of Man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his angels, and then
he shall reward every man according to his works_. The same we may read,
_Mark_ xiii. 26, and xiv. 62; and more expressly for the time, _Luke_
xxii. 29, 30, _I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed
to me, that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on
thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel_. By which it is manifest,
that the kingdom of Christ appointed to him by his Father, is not to be
before the Son of Man shall come in glory, and make his apostles judges
of the twelve tribes of Israel. But a man may here ask, seeing there is
no marriage in the kingdom of heaven, whether men shall then eat and
drink? What eating therefore is meant in this place? This is expounded
by our Saviour (_John_ vi. 27), where he saith, _Labour not for the meat
which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life,
which the Son of Man shall give you_. So that by eating at Christ’s
table, is meant the eating of the tree of life; that is to say, the
enjoying of immortality, in the kingdom of the Son of Man. By which
places and many more, it is evident that our Saviour’s kingdom is to be
exercised by him in his human nature.

[Sidenote: Christ’s authority in the kingdom of God, subordinate to that
           of his Father.]

Again, he is to be king then, no otherwise than as subordinate or
vicegerent of God the Father, as Moses was in the wilderness; and as the
high-priests were before the reign of Saul; and as the kings were after
it. For it is one of the prophecies concerning Christ, that he should be
like, in office, to Moses: _I will raise them up a prophet_, saith the
Lord (_Deut._ xviii. 18) _from amongst their brethren, like unto thee,
and will put my words into his mouth_; and this similitude with Moses,
is also apparent in the actions of our Saviour himself, whilst he was
conversant on earth. For as Moses chose twelve princes of the tribes, to
govern under him; so did our Saviour choose twelve apostles, who shall
sit on twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. And as
Moses authorized seventy elders, to receive the Spirit of God, and to
prophecy to the people, that is, as I have said before, to speak unto
them in the name of God; so our Saviour also ordained seventy disciples,
to preach his kingdom and salvation to all nations. And as when a
complaint was made to Moses, against those of the seventy that
prophecied in the camp of Israel, he justified them in it, as being
subservient therein to his government; so also our Saviour, when St.
John complained to him of a certain man that cast out devils in his
name, justified him therein, saying, (_Luke_ ix. 50) _Forbid him not,
for he that is not against us, is on our part_.

[Sidenote: Christ’s authority in the kingdom of God, subordinate to that
           of his Father.]

Again, our Saviour resembled Moses in the institution of _sacraments_,
both of _admission_ into the kingdom of God, and of _commemoration_ of
his deliverance of his elect from their miserable condition. As the
children of Israel had for sacrament of their reception into the kingdom
of God, before the time of Moses, the rite of _circumcision_, which rite
having been omitted in the wilderness, was again restored as soon as
they came into the Land of Promise; so also the Jews, before the coming
of our Saviour, had a rite of _baptizing_, that is, of washing with
water, all those that being Gentiles embraced the God of Israel. This
rite St. John the Baptist used in the reception of all them that gave
their names to the Christ, whom he preached to be already come into the
world; and our Saviour instituted the same for a sacrament to be taken
by all that believed in him. From what cause the rite of baptism first
proceeded, is not expressed formally in the Scripture; but it may be
probably thought to be an imitation of the law of Moses, concerning
leprosy; wherein the leprous man was commanded to be kept out of the
camp of Israel for a certain time; after which time being judged by the
priest to be clean, he was admitted into the camp after a solemn
washing. And this may therefore be a type of the washing in baptism;
wherein such men as are cleansed of the leprosy of sin by faith, are
received into the Church with the solemnity of baptism. There is another
conjecture, drawn from the ceremonies of the Gentiles, in a certain case
that rarely happens: and that is, when a man that was thought dead
chanced to recover, other men made scruple to converse with him, as they
would do to converse with a ghost, unless he were received again into
the number of men by washing, as children new-born were washed from the
uncleanness of their nativity; which was a kind of new birth. This
ceremony of the Greeks, in the time that Judea was under the dominion of
Alexander and the Greeks his successors, may probably enough have crept
into the religion of the Jews. But seeing it is not likely our Saviour
would countenance a heathen rite, it is most likely it proceeded from
the legal ceremony of washing after leprosy. And for the other sacrament
of eating the _Paschal lamb_, it is manifestly imitated in the sacrament
of the _Lord’s Supper_; in which the breaking of the bread, and the
pouring out of the wine, do keep in memory our deliverance from the
misery of sin, by Christ’s passion, as the eating of the Paschal lamb
kept in memory the deliverance of the Jews out of the bondage of Egypt.
Seeing therefore the authority of Moses was but subordinate, and he but
a lieutenant of God; it followeth that Christ, whose authority, as man,
was to be like that of Moses, was no more but subordinate to the
authority of his Father. The same is more expressly signified, by that
that he teacheth us to pray, _Our Father, let thy kingdom come_; and,
_For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory_; and by that it is
said, that _He shall come in the glory of his Father_; and by that which
St. Paul saith, (_1 Cor._ xv. 24) _then cometh the end, when he shall
have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father_; and by many
other most express places.

[Sidenote: One and the same God is the person represented by Moses and
           Christ.]

Our Saviour, therefore, both in teaching and reigning, representeth, as
Moses did, the person of God; which God from that time forward, but not
before, is called the Father; and being still one and the same
substance, is one person as represented by Moses, and another person as
represented by his son the Christ. For _person_ being a relative to a
_representer_, it is consequent to plurality of representers, that there
be a plurality of persons, though of one and the same substance.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XLII.

                        OF POWER ECCLESIASTICAL.


For the understanding of POWER ECCLESIASTICAL, what, and in whom it is,
we are to distinguish the time from the ascension of our Saviour, into
two parts; one before the conversion of kings, and men endued with
sovereign civil power; the other after their conversion. For it was long
after the ascension, before any king or civil sovereign embraced and
publicly allowed the teaching of Christian religion.

[Sidenote: Of the holy spirit that fell on the apostles.]

And for the time between, it is manifest, that the _power
ecclesiastical_ was in the apostles; and after them in such as were by
them ordained to preach the gospel, and to convert men to Christianity,
and to direct them that were converted in the way of salvation; and
after these, the power was delivered again to others by these ordained,
and this was done by imposition of hands upon such as were ordained; by
which was signified the giving of the Holy Spirit, or Spirit of God, to
those whom they ordained ministers of God, to advance his kingdom. So
that imposition of hands was nothing else but the seal of their
commission to preach Christ, and teach his doctrine; and the giving of
the Holy Ghost by that ceremony of imposition of hands, was an imitation
of that which Moses did. For Moses used the same ceremony to his
minister Joshua, as we read (_Deut._ xxxiv. 9) _And Joshua the son of
Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon
him_. Our Saviour therefore, between his resurrection and ascension,
gave his spirit to the apostles; first, by _breathing on them, and
saying_, (_John_ xx. 22) _Receive ye the Holy Spirit_; and after his
ascension (_Acts_ ii. 2, 3) by sending down upon them _a mighty wind,
and cloven tongues of fire_; and not by imposition of hands; as neither
did God lay his hands on Moses: and his apostles afterward transmitted
the same spirit by imposition of hands, as Moses did to Joshua. So that
it is manifest hereby, in whom the power ecclesiastical continually
remained, in those first times where there was not any Christian
commonwealth; namely, in them that received the same from the apostles,
by successive laying on of hands.

[Sidenote: Of the Trinity.]

Here we have the person of God born now the third time. For as Moses,
and the high-priests, were God’s representative in the Old Testament;
and our Saviour himself, as man, during his abode on earth: so the Holy
Ghost, that is to say the apostles and their successors, in the office
of preaching and teaching, that had received the holy Spirit, have
represented him ever since. But a person, as I have shown before, (chap.
XIII.) is he that is represented, as often as he is represented; and
therefore God, who has been represented, that is personated, thrice, may
properly enough be said to be three persons; though neither the word
_Person_, nor _Trinity_, be ascribed to him in the Bible. _St. John_,
indeed (_1 Epist._ v. 7) saith, _There be three that bear witness in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and these three are
One_. But this disagreeth not, but accordeth fitly with three persons in
the proper signification of persons; which is, that which is represented
by another. For so God the Father, as represented by Moses, is one
person; and as represented by his Son, another person; and as
represented by the apostles, and by the doctors that taught by authority
from them derived, is a third person; and yet every person here, is the
person of one and the same God. But a man may here ask, what it was
whereof these three bear witness. _St. John_ therefore tells us (verse
11) that they bear witness, that _God hath given us eternal life in his
Son_. Again, if it should be asked, wherein that testimony appeareth,
the answer is easy; for he hath testified the same by the miracles he
wrought, first by Moses; secondly, by his Son himself; and lastly by his
apostles, that had received the Holy Spirit; all which in their times
represented the person of God, and either prophecied or preached Jesus
Christ. And as for the apostles, it was the character of the
apostleship, in the twelve first and great apostles, to bear witness of
his resurrection; as appeareth expressly (_Acts_ i. 21, 22), where St.
Peter, when a new apostle was to be chosen in the place of Judas
Iscariot, useth these words, _Of these men which have companied with us
all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst us, beginning
at the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up from us,
must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection_: which
words interpret the _bearing of witness_, mentioned by St. John. There
is in the same place mentioned another Trinity of witnesses in earth.
For (_1 John_ v. 8) he saith, _there are three that bear witness in
earth, the Spirit, and the water, and the blood, and these three agree
in one_: that is to say, the graces of God’s spirit, and the two
sacraments, baptism, and the Lord’s supper, which all agree in one
testimony to assure the consciences of believers, of eternal life; of
which testimony he saith (verse 10) _He that believeth on the Son of man
hath the witness in himself_. In this Trinity on earth, the unity is not
of the thing; for the spirit, the water, and the blood, are not the same
substance, though they give the same testimony: but in the Trinity of
heaven, the persons are the persons of one and the same God, though
represented in three different times and occasions. To conclude, the
doctrine of the Trinity, as far as can be gathered directly from the
Scripture, is in substance this, that the God who is always one and the
same, was the person represented by Moses; the person represented by his
Son incarnate; and the person represented by the apostles. As
represented by the apostles, the Holy Spirit, by which they spake, is
God; as represented by his Son, that was God and man, the Son is that
God; as represented by Moses and the high-priests, the Father, that is
to say, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is that God. From whence we
may gather the reason why those names _Father_, _Son_, and _Holy
Spirit_, in the signification of the Godhead, are never used in the Old
Testament: for they are persons, that is, they have their names from
representing; which could not be, till divers men had represented God’s
person in ruling or in directing under him.

Thus we see how the power ecclesiastical was left by our Saviour to the
apostles; and how they were, to the end they might the better exercise
that power, endued with the Holy Spirit, which is therefore called
sometimes in the New Testament _paracletus_, which signifieth an
_assister_, or one called to for help, though it be commonly translated
a _comforter_. Let us now consider the power itself, what it was, and
over whom.

[Sidenote: The power ecclesiastical is but the power to teach.]

Cardinal Bellarmine, in his third general controversy, hath handled a
great many questions concerning the ecclesiastical power of the pope of
Rome; and begins with this, whether it ought to be monarchical,
aristocratical, or democratical: all which sorts of power are sovereign
and coercive. If now it should appear, that there is no coercive power
left them by our Saviour, but only a power to proclaim the kingdom of
Christ, and to persuade men to submit themselves thereunto; and by
precepts and good counsel, to teach them that have submitted, what they
are to do, that they may be received into the kingdom of God when it
comes; and that the apostles, and other ministers of the Gospel, are our
schoolmasters, and not our commanders, and their precepts not laws, but
wholesome counsels: then were all that dispute in vain.

[Sidenote: An argument thereof, the power of Christ himself.]

I have shown already, in the last chapter, that the kingdom of Christ is
not of this world: therefore neither can his ministers, unless they be
kings, require obedience in his name. For if the supreme king have not
his regal power in this world; by what authority can obedience be
required to his officers? _As my Father sent me_, so saith our Saviour,
(_John_ xx. 21) _I send you_. But our Saviour was sent to persuade the
Jews to return to, and to invite the Gentiles to receive, the kingdom of
his Father, and not to reign in majesty, no not as his Father’s
lieutenant, till the day of judgment.

[Sidenote: From the name of regeneration.]

The time between the ascension and the general resurrection, is called,
not a reigning, but a regeneration; that is, a preparation of men for
the second and glorious coming of Christ, at the day of judgment; as
appeareth by the words of our Saviour, (_Matth._ xix. 28,) _You that
have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in
the throne of his glory, you shall also sit upon twelve thrones_; and of
St. Paul (_Ephes._ vi. 15) _Having your feet shod with the preparation
of the gospel of peace_.

[Sidenote: From the comparison of it, with fishing, leaven, seed.]

And is compared by our Saviour, to fishing, that is, to winning men to
obedience, not by coercion and punishing, but by persuasion: and
therefore he said not to his apostles, he would make them so many
Nimrods, _hunters of men; but fishers of men_. It is compared also to
leaven, to sowing of seed, and to the multiplication of a grain of
mustard-seed; by all which compulsion is excluded; and consequently
there can in that time be no actual reigning. The work of Christ’s
ministers, is evangelization; that is, a proclamation of Christ, and a
preparation for his second coming, as the evangelization of John the
Baptist was a preparation to his first coming.

[Sidenote: From the nature of faith.]

Again, the office of Christ’s ministers in this world, is to make men
believe and have faith in Christ; but faith hath no relation to, nor
dependance at all upon compulsion or commandment; but only upon
certainty or probability of arguments drawn from reason, or from
something men believe already. Therefore the ministers of Christ in this
world, have no power, by that title, to punish any man for not believing
or for contradicting what they say; they have I say no power by that
title of Christ’s ministers, to punish such; but if they have sovereign
civil power, by politic institution, then they may indeed lawfully
punish any contradiction to their laws whatsoever: and St. Paul, of
himself and other the then preachers of the gospel, saith in express
words (_2 Cor._ i. 24), _We have no dominion over your faith, but are
helpers of your joy_.

[Sidenote: From the authority Christ hath left to civil princes.]

Another argument, that the ministers of Christ in this present world
have no right of commanding, may be drawn from the lawful authority
which Christ hath left to all princes, as well Christians as infidels.
St. Paul saith (_Col._ iii. 20) _Children obey your parents in all
things; for this is well pleasing to the Lord_: and (verse 22)
_Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh; not
with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, as
fearing the Lord_; this is spoken to them whose masters were infidels;
and yet they are bidden to obey them _in all things_. And again,
concerning obedience to princes (_Rom._ xiii. the first six verses),
exhorting _to be subject to the higher powers_, he saith, _that all
power is ordained of God_; and _that we ought to be subject to them, not
only for fear of incurring their wrath, but also for conscience sake_.
And _St. Peter_ (1 Epistle ii. 13, 14, 15), _Submit yourselves to every
ordinance of man, for the Lord’s sake, whether it be to the king, as
supreme; or unto governors, as to them that be sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well; for
so is the will of God_. And again St. Paul (_Titus_ iii. 1), _Put men in
mind to be subject to principalities and powers, and to obey
magistrates_. These princes and powers, whereof St. Peter and St. Paul
here speak, were all infidels: much more therefore we are to observe
those Christians, whom God hath ordained to have sovereign power over
us. How then can we be obliged to obey any minister of Christ, if he
should command us to do anything contrary to the command of the king, or
other sovereign representant of the commonwealth whereof we are members,
and by whom we look to be protected? It is therefore manifest, that
Christ hath not left to his ministers in this world, unless they be also
endued with civil authority, any authority to command other men.

[Sidenote: What Christians may do to avoid persecution.]

But what, may some object, if a king, or a senate, or other sovereign
person forbid us to believe in Christ? To this I answer, that such
forbidding is of no effect; because belief and unbelief never follow
men’s commands. Faith is a gift of God, which man can neither give, nor
take away by promise of rewards, or menaces of torture. And if it be
further asked, what if we be commanded by our lawful prince to say with
our tongue, we believe not; must we obey such command? Profession with
the tongue is but an external thing, and no more than any other gesture
whereby we signify our obedience; and wherein a Christian, holding
firmly in his heart the faith of Christ, hath the same liberty which the
prophet Elisha allowed to Naaman the Syrian. Naaman was converted in his
heart to the God of Israel; for he saith (_2 Kings_ v. 17, 18) _Thy
servant will henceforth offer neither burnt offering nor sacrifice unto
other gods, but unto the Lord. In this thing the Lord pardon thy
servant, that when my master goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship
there, and he leaneth on my hand, and I bow myself in the house of
Rimmon: when I bow down myself in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon
thy servant in this thing._ This the prophet approved, and bid him _Go
in peace_. Here Naaman believed in his heart; but by bowing before the
idol Rimmon, he denied the true God in effect, as much as if he had done
it with his lips. But then what shall we answer to our Saviour’s saying,
(_Matth._ x. 33) _Whosoever denieth me before men, I will deny him
before my Father which is in heaven_. This we may say, that whatsoever a
subject, as Naaman was, is compelled to do in obedience to his
sovereign, and doth it not in order to his own mind, but in order to the
laws of his country, that action is not his, but his sovereign’s; nor is
it he that in this case denieth Christ before men, but his governor, and
the law of his country. If any man shall accuse this doctrine, as
repugnant to true and unfeigned Christianity; I ask him, in case there
should be a subject in any Christian commonwealth, that should be
inwardly in his heart of the Mahomedan religion, whether if his
sovereign command him to be present at the divine service of the
Christian church, and that on pain of death, he think that Mahomedan
obliged in conscience to suffer death for that cause, rather than obey
that command of his lawful prince. If he say, he ought rather to suffer
death, then he authorizeth all private men to disobey their princes in
maintenance of their religion, true or false: if he say, he ought to be
obedient, then he alloweth to himself that which he denieth to another,
contrary to the words of our Saviour, (_Luke_ vi. 31) _Whatsoever you
would that men should do unto you, that do ye unto them_; and contrary
to the law of nature, which is the indubitable everlasting law of God,
_Do not to another, that which thou wouldest not he should do unto
thee_.

[Sidenote: Of martyrs.]

But what then shall we say of all those martyrs we read of in the
history of the Church, that they have needlessly cast away their lives?
For answer hereunto, we are to distinguish the persons that have been
for that cause put to death: whereof some have received a calling to
preach, and profess the kingdom of Christ openly; others have had no
such calling, nor more has been required of them than their own faith.
The former sort, if they have been put to death, for bearing witness to
this point, that Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, were true martyrs;
for a _martyr_ is, (to give the true definition of the word) a witness
of the resurrection of Jesus the Messiah; which none can be but those
that conversed with him on earth, and saw him after he was risen: for a
witness must have seen what he testifieth, or else his testimony is not
good. And that none but such can properly be called martyrs of Christ,
is manifest out of the words of St. Peter, (_Acts_ i. 21, 22) _Wherefore
of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord
Jesus went in and out amongst us, beginning from the baptism of John
unto that same day he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a
martyr_ (that is a witness) _with us of his resurrection_: where we may
observe, that he which is to be a witness of the truth of the
resurrection of Christ, that is to say, of the truth of this fundamental
article of Christian religion, that Jesus was the Christ, must be some
disciple that conversed with him, and saw him before and after his
resurrection; and consequently must be one of his original disciples:
whereas they which were not so, can witness no more but that their
antecessors said it, and are therefore but witnesses of other men’s
testimony; and are but second martyrs, or martyrs of Christ’s witnesses.

He, that to maintain every doctrine which he himself draweth out of the
history of our Saviour’s life, and of the Acts or Epistles of the
apostles, or which he believeth upon the authority of a private man,
will oppose the laws and authority of the civil state, is very far from
being a martyr of Christ, or a martyr of his martyrs. It is one article
only, which to die for, meriteth so honourable a name; and that article
is this, that _Jesus is the Christ_; that is to say, He that hath
redeemed us, and shall come again to give us salvation, and eternal life
in his glorious kingdom. To die for every tenet that serveth the
ambition or profit of the clergy, is not required; nor is it the death
of the witness, but the testimony itself that makes the martyr: for the
word signifieth nothing else, but the man that beareth witness, whether
he be put to death for his testimony, or not.

Also he that is not sent to preach this fundamental article, but taketh
it upon him of his private authority, though he be a witness, and
consequently a martyr, either primary of Christ, or secondary of his
apostles, disciples, or their successors; yet is he not obliged to
suffer death for that cause; because being not called thereto, it is not
required at his hands; nor ought he to complain, if he loseth the reward
he expecteth from those that never set him on work. None therefore can
be a martyr, neither of the first nor second degree, that have not a
warrant to preach Christ come in the flesh; that is to say, none, but
such as are sent to the conversion of infidels. For no man is a witness
to him that already believeth, and therefore needs no witness; but to
them that deny, or doubt, or have not heard it. Christ sent his
apostles, and his seventy disciples, with authority to preach; he sent
not all that believed. And he sent them to unbelievers; _I send you_,
saith he, (_Matth._ x. 16) _as sheep amongst wolves_; not as sheep to
other sheep.

[Sidenote: Argument from the points of their commission.]

Lastly, the points of their commission, as they are expressly set down
in the gospel, contain, none of them, any authority over the
congregation.

[Sidenote: To preach;]

We have first (_Matth._ x. 6, 7), that the twelve apostles were sent _to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel_, and commanded to preach _that
the kingdom of God was at hand_. Now preaching, in the original, is that
act, which a crier, herald, or other officer useth to do publicly in
proclaiming of a king. But a crier hath not right to command any man.
And (_Luke_ x. 2) the seventy disciples are sent out as _Labourers, not
as Lords of the harvest_; and are bidden (verse 9) to say, _The kingdom
of God is come nigh unto you_; and by kingdom here is meant, not the
kingdom of grace, but the kingdom of glory; for they are bidden (verse
11, 12) to denounce it to those cities which shall not receive them, as
a threatening _that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom,
than for such a city_. And (_Matth._ xx. 28) our Saviour telleth his
disciples, that sought priority of place, their office was to minister,
_even as the son of man came, not to be ministered unto, but to
minister_. Preachers therefore have not magisterial, but ministerial
power: _Be not called masters_, saith our Saviour, (_Matth._ xxiii. 10)
_for one is your master, even Christ_.

[Sidenote: And teach;]

Another point of their commission, is, to _Teach all nations_; as it is
in _St. Matth._ xxviii. 19, or as in _St. Mark_, xvi. 15; _Go into all
the world, and preach the gospel to every creature_. Teaching therefore,
and preaching, is the same thing. For they that proclaim the coming of a
king, must withal make known by what right he cometh, if they mean men
shall submit themselves unto him: as St. Paul did to the Jews of
Thessalonica, when (_Acts_ xvii. 2, 3) _three Sabbath days he reasoned
with them out of the Scriptures, opening, and alleging that Christ must
needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead, and that this Jesus
is Christ_. But to teach out of the Old Testament that Jesus was Christ,
that is to say, king, and risen from the dead, is not to say that men
are bound, after they believe it, to obey those that tell them so,
against the laws and commands of their sovereigns; but that they shall
do wisely, to expect the coming of Christ hereafter, in patience and
faith, with obedience to their present magistrates.

[Sidenote: To baptize;]

Another point of their commission, is to _baptize, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost_. What is baptism? Dipping
into water. But what is it to dip a man into the water in the name of
anything? The meaning of these words of baptism is this. He that is
baptized, is dipped or washed, as a sign of becoming a new man, and a
loyal subject to that God, whose person was represented in old time by
Moses, and the high-priests, when he reigned over the Jews; and to Jesus
Christ his Son, God and Man, that hath redeemed us, and shall in his
human nature represent his Father’s person in his eternal kingdom after
the resurrection; and to acknowledge the doctrine of the apostles, who,
assisted by the spirit of the Father and of the Son, were left for
guides to bring us into that kingdom, to be the only and assured way
thereunto. This being our promise in baptism; and the authority of
earthly sovereigns being not to be put down till the day of judgment;
for that is expressly affirmed by St. Paul (_1 Cor._ xv. 22, 23, 24)
where he saith, _As in Adam all die, so in Christ all shall be made
alive. But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits,
afterward they that are Christ’s at his coming; then cometh the end,
when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father,
when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power_: it
is manifest, that we do not in baptism constitute over us another
authority, by which our external actions are to be governed in this
life; but promise to take the doctrine of the apostles for our direction
in the way to life eternal.

[Sidenote: And to forgive, and retain sins.]

The power of _remission and retention of sins_, called also the power of
_loosing_ and _binding_, and sometimes the _keys of the kingdom of
heaven_, is a consequence of the authority to baptize, or refuse to
baptize. For baptism is the sacrament of allegiance of them that are to
be received into the kingdom of God; that is to say, into eternal life;
that is to say, to remission of sin: for as eternal life was lost by the
committing, so it is recovered by the remitting of men’s sins. The end
of baptism is remission of sins: and therefore St. Peter, when they that
were converted by his sermon on the day of Pentecost, asked what they
were to do, advised them (_Acts_ ii. 38) to _repent, and be baptized in
the name of Jesus, for the remission of sins_. And therefore, seeing to
baptize is to declare the reception of men into God’s kingdom; and to
refuse to baptize is to declare their exclusion; it followeth, that the
power to declare them cast out, or retained in it, was given to the same
apostles, and their substitutes and successors. And therefore after our
Saviour had breathed upon them, saying (_John_ xx. 22) _Receive the Holy
Ghost_, he addeth in the next verse, _Whosesoever sins ye remit, they
are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are
retained_. By which words, is not granted an authority to forgive or
retain sins, simply and absolutely, as God forgiveth or retaineth them,
who knoweth the heart of man, and truth of his penitence and conversion;
but conditionally, to the penitent: and this forgiveness, or absolution,
in case the absolved have but a feigned repentance, is thereby, without
other act, or sentence of the absolved, made void, and hath no effect at
all to salvation, but on the contrary to the aggravation of his sin.
Therefore the apostles, and their successors, are to follow but the
outward marks of repentance; which appearing, they have no authority to
deny absolution; and if they appear not, they have no authority to
absolve. The same also is to be observed in baptism: for to a converted
Jew, or Gentile, the apostles had not the power to deny baptism; nor to
grant it to the unpenitent. But seeing no man is able to discern the
truth of another man’s repentance, further than by external marks, taken
from his words and actions, which are subject to hypocrisy; another
question will arise, who it is that is constituted judge of those marks?
And this question is decided by our Saviour himself; _If thy brother_,
saith he, (_Matth._ xviii. 15, 16, 17) _shall trespass against thee, go
and tell him his fault, between thee and him alone; if he shall hear
thee, thou hast gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, then
take with thee one or two more. And if he shall neglect to hear them,
tell it unto the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him
be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican._ By which it is manifest,
that the judgment concerning the truth of repentance, belonged not to
any one man, but to the Church, that is, to the assembly of the
faithful, or to them that have authority to be their representant. But
besides the judgment, there is necessary also the pronouncing of
sentence. And this belonged always to the apostle, or some pastor of the
Church, as prolocutor; and of this our Saviour speaketh in the 18th
verse, _Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven_. And
conformable hereunto was the practise of St. Paul, (_1 Cor._ v. 3, 4, 5)
where he saith, _For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit,
have determined already, as though I were present, concerning him that
hath so done this deed; in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye
are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to deliver such a one to Satan_; that is to say, to cast him out
of the Church, as a man whose sins are not forgiven. Paul here
pronounceth the sentence; but the assembly was first to hear the cause,
for St. Paul was absent, and by consequence to condemn him. But in the
same chapter (verses 11, 12), the judgment in such a case is more
expressly attributed to the assembly: _But now I have written unto you,
not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a
fornicator, &c. with such a one, no not to eat. For what have I to do to
judge them that are without? Do not ye judge them that are within?_ The
sentence therefore by which a man was put out of the Church, was
pronounced by the apostle, or pastor; but the judgment concerning the
merit of the cause, was in the Church; that is to say, as the times were
before the conversion of kings, and men that had sovereign authority in
the commonwealth, the assembly of the Christians dwelling in the same
city: as in Corinth, in the assembly of the Christians of Corinth.

[Sidenote: Of excommunication.]

This part of the power of the keys, by which men were thrust out from
the kingdom of God, is that which is called _excommunication_; and to
_excommunicate_, is in the original, ἀποσυνάγωγον ποιεῖν, _to cast out
of the synagogue_; that is, out of the place of divine service; a word
drawn from the custom of the Jews, to cast out of their synagogues such
as they thought, in manners or doctrine, contagious, as lepers were by
the law of Moses separated from the congregation of Israel, till such
time as they should be by the priest pronounced clean.

[Sidenote: The use of excommunication without civil power.]

The use and effect of excommunication, whilst it was not yet
strengthened with the civil power, was no more than that they, who were
not excommunicate, were to avoid the company of them that were. It was
not enough to repute them as heathen, that never had been Christians;
for with such they might eat and drink; which with excommunicate persons
they might not do; as appeareth by the words of St. Paul, (_1 Cor._ v.
9, 10, &c.) where he telleth them, he had formerly forbidden them to
_company with fornicators_; but, because that could not be without going
out of the world, he restraineth it to such fornicators, and otherwise
vicious persons, as were of the brethren; _with such a one_, he saith,
they ought not to keep company, _no not to eat_. And this is no more
than our Saviour saith (_Matth._ xviii. 17), _Let him be to thee as a
heathen, and as a publican_. For publicans, which signifieth farmers and
receivers of the revenue of the commonwealth, were so hated and detested
by the Jews that were to pay it, as that _publican_ and _sinner_ were
taken amongst them for the same thing: insomuch, as when our Saviour
accepted the invitation of Zacchæus a publican; though it were to
convert him, yet it was objected to him as a crime. And therefore, when
our Saviour to _heathen_ added _publican_, he did forbid them to eat
with a man excommunicate.

As for keeping them out of their synagogues, or places of assembly, they
had no power to do it, but that of the owner of the place, whether he
were Christian, or heathen. And because all places are by right in the
dominion of the commonwealth; as well he that was excommunicated, as he
that never was baptized, might enter into them by commission from the
civil magistrate; as Paul before his conversion entered into their
synagogues at Damascus, (_Acts_ ix. 2) to apprehend Christians, men and
women, and to carry them bound to Jerusalem, by commission from the
high-priest.

[Sidenote: Of no effect upon an apostate;]

By which it appears, that upon a Christian, that should become an
apostate, in a place where the civil power did persecute, or not assist
the Church, the effect of excommunication had nothing in it, neither of
damage in this world, nor of terror: not of terror, because of their
unbelief; nor of damage, because they are returned thereby into the
favour of the world; and in the world to come were to be in no worse
estate, than they which never had believed. The damage redounded rather
to the Church, by provocation of them they cast out, to a freer
execution of their malice.

[Sidenote: But upon the faithful only.]

Excommunication therefore had its effect only upon those, that believed
that Jesus Christ was to come again in glory, to reign over and to judge
both the quick and the dead, and should therefore refuse entrance into
his kingdom to those whose sins were retained, that is, to those that
were excommunicated by the Church. And thence it is, that St. Paul
calleth excommunication, a delivery of the excommunicate person to
Satan. For without the kingdom of Christ, all other kingdoms, after
judgment, are comprehended in the kingdom of Satan. This is it that the
faithful stood in fear of, as long as they stood excommunicate, that is
to say, in an estate wherein their sins were not forgiven. Whereby we
may understand, that excommunication, in the time that Christian
religion was not authorized by the civil power, was used only for a
correction of manners, not of errors in opinion: for it is a punishment,
whereof none could be sensible but such as believed, and expected the
coming again of our Saviour to judge the world; and they who so
believed, needed no other opinion, but only uprightness of life, to be
saved.

[Sidenote: For what fault lieth excommunication.]

There lieth excommunication for injustice; as (_Matth._ xviii.), If thy
brother offend thee, tell it him privately; then with witnesses; lastly,
tell the Church; and then if he obey not, _Let him be to thee as an
heathen man and a publican_. And there lieth excommunication for a
scandalous life, as (_1 Cor._ v. 11) _If any man that is called a
brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a drunkard, or
an extortioner, with such a one ye are not to eat_. But to excommunicate
a man that held this foundation, that _Jesus was the Christ_, for
difference of opinion in other points, by which that foundation was not
destroyed, there appeareth no authority in the Scripture, nor example in
the apostles. There is indeed in St. Paul (_Titus_ iii. 10) a text that
seemeth to be to the contrary; _A man that is an heretic, after the
first and second admonition, reject_. For an _heretic_, is he, that
being a member of the Church, teacheth nevertheless some private
opinion, which the Church has forbidden: and such a one, St. Paul
adviseth Titus, after the first and second admonition, to _reject_. But
to _reject_, in this place, is not to _excommunicate_ the man; but to
_give over admonishing him, to let him alone, to set by disputing with
him_, as one that is to be convinced only by himself. The same apostle
saith (_2 Tim._ ii. 23) _Foolish and unlearned questions avoid_: the
word _avoid_ in this place, and _reject_ in the former, is the same in
the original, παραιτοῦ: but foolish questions may be set by without
excommunication. And again, (_Titus_ iii. 9) _Avoid foolish questions_,
where the original περιΐστασο (_set them by_) is equivalent to the
former word _reject_. There is no other place that can so much as
colourably be drawn, to countenance the casting out of the Church
faithful men, such as believed the foundation, only for a singular
superstructure of their own, proceeding perhaps from a good and pious
conscience. But on the contrary, all such places as command avoiding
such disputes, are written for a lesson to pastors, such as Timothy and
Titus were, not to make new articles of faith, by determining every
small controversy, which oblige men to a needless burthen of conscience,
or provoke them to break the union of the Church. Which lesson the
apostles themselves observed well. St. Peter and St. Paul, though their
controversy were great, as we may read in _Gal._ ii. 11, yet they did
not cast one another out of the Church. Nevertheless, during the
apostles’ times, there were other pastors that observed it not; as
Diotrephes (_3 John_, 9, &c.) who cast out of the Church such as St.
John himself thought fit to be received into it, out of a pride he took
in preeminence. So early it was, that vain glory and ambition had found
entrance into the Church of Christ.

[Sidenote: Of persons liable to excommunication.]

That a man be liable to excommunication, there be many conditions
requisite; as first, that he be a member of some commonalty, that is to
say, of some lawful assembly, that is to say, of some Christian Church,
that hath power to judge of the cause for which he is to be
excommunicated. For where there is no community, there can be no
excommunication; nor where there is no power to judge, can there be any
power to give sentence.

From hence it followeth, that one Church cannot be excommunicated by
another: for either they have equal power to excommunicate each other,
in which case excommunication is not discipline, nor an act of
authority, but schism, and dissolution of charity; or one is so
subordinate to the other, as that they both have but one voice; and then
they be but one Church; and the part excommunicated is no more a Church,
but a dissolute number of individual persons.

And because the sentence of excommunication, importeth an advice, not to
keep company nor so much as to eat with him that is excommunicate, if a
sovereign prince or assembly be excommunicate, the sentence is of no
effect. For all subjects are bound to be in the company and presence of
their own sovereign, when he requireth it, by the law of nature; nor can
they lawfully either expel him from any place of his own dominion,
whether profane or holy; nor go out of his dominion without his leave;
much less, if he call them to that honour, refuse to eat with him. And
as to other princes and states, because they are not parts of one and
the same congregation, they need not any other sentence to keep them
from keeping company with the state excommunicate: for the very
institution, as it uniteth many men into one community, so it
dissociateth one community from another: so that excommunication is not
needful for keeping kings and states asunder; nor has any further effect
than is in the nature of policy itself, unless it be to instigate
princes to war upon one another.

Nor is the excommunication of a Christian subject, that obeyeth the laws
of his own sovereign, whether Christian or heathen, of any effect. For
if he believe that _Jesus is the Christ, he hath the Spirit of God_ (_1
John_ v. 1): _and God dwelleth in him, and he in God_ (_1 John_ iv. 15.)
But he that hath the spirit of God; he that dwelleth in God; he in whom
God dwelleth, can receive no harm by the excommunication of men.
Therefore, he that believeth Jesus to be the Christ, is free from all
the dangers threatened to persons excommunicate. He that believeth it
not, is no Christian. Therefore a true and unfeigned Christian is not
liable to excommunication: nor he also that is a professed Christian,
till his hypocrisy appear in his manners, that is, till his behaviour be
contrary to the law of his sovereign, which is the rule of manners, and
which Christ and his apostles have commanded us to be subject to. For
the Church cannot judge of manners but by external actions, which
actions can never be unlawful, but when they are against the law of the
commonwealth.

If a man’s father, or mother, or master, be excommunicate, yet are not
the children forbidden to keep them company, nor to eat with them: for
that were, for the most part, to oblige them not to eat at all, for want
of means to get food; and to authorize them to disobey their parents and
masters, contrary to the precept of the apostles.

In sum, the power of excommunication cannot be extended further than to
the end for which the apostles and pastors of the Church have their
commission from our Saviour; which is not to rule by command and
co-action, but by teaching and direction of men in the way of salvation
in the world to come. And as a master in any science may abandon his
scholar, when he obstinately neglecteth the practise of his rules; but
not accuse him of injustice, because he was never bound to obey him: so
a teacher of Christian doctrine may abandon his disciples that
obstinately continue in an unchristian life; but he cannot say, they do
him wrong, because they are not obliged to obey him. For to a teacher
that shall so complain, may be applied the answer of God to Samuel in
the like place, (_1 Sam._ viii. 7) _They have not rejected thee, but
me_. Excommunication therefore, when it wanteth the assistance of the
civil power, as it doth, when a Christian state or prince is
excommunicate by a foreign authority, is without effect; and
consequently ought to be without terror. The name of _Fulmen
excommunicationis_, that is, the _thunderbolt of excommunication_,
proceeded from an imagination of the Bishop of Rome, which first used
it, that he was king of kings; as the heathen made Jupiter king of the
gods, and assigned him, in their poems, and pictures, a thunderbolt,
wherewith to subdue and punish the giants, that should dare to deny his
power. Which imagination was grounded on two errors; one, that the
kingdom of Christ is of this world, contrary to our Saviour’s own words,
(_John_ xviii. 36) _My kingdom is not of this world_; the other, that he
is Christ’s vicar, not only over his own subjects, but over all the
Christians of the world; whereof there is no ground in Scripture, and
the contrary shall be proved in its due place.

[Sidenote: Of the interpreter of the Scriptures, before civil sovereigns
           became Christians.]

St. Paul coming to Thessalonica, where was a Synagogue of the Jews,
(_Acts_, xvii. 2, 3) _as his manner was, went in unto them, and three
Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, opening and
alleging, that Christ must needs have suffered and risen again from the
dead; and that this Jesus whom he preached was the Christ_. The
Scriptures here mentioned were the Scriptures of the Jews, that is, the
Old Testament. The men, to whom he was to prove that Jesus was the
Christ and risen again from the dead, were also Jews, and did believe
already, that they were the word of God. Hereupon (as it is in verse 4)
some of them believed, and (as it is in verse 5) some believed not. What
was the reason, when they all believed the Scripture, that they did not
all believe alike; but that some approved, others disapproved the
interpretation of St. Paul that cited them; and every one interpreted
them to himself? It was this; St. Paul came to them without any legal
commission, and in the manner of one that would not command, but
persuade; which he must needs do, either by miracles, as Moses did to
the Israelites in Egypt, that they might see his authority in God’s
works; or by reasoning from the already received Scripture, that they
might see the truth of his doctrine in God’s word. But whosoever
persuadeth by reasoning from principles written, maketh him to whom he
speaketh judge, both of the meaning of those principles, and also of the
force of his inferences upon them. If these Jews of Thessalonica were
not, who else was the judge of what St. Paul alleged out of Scripture?
If St. Paul, what needed he to quote any places to prove his doctrine?
It had been enough to have said, I find it so in Scripture, that is to
say, in your laws, of which I am interpreter, as sent by Christ. The
interpreter therefore of the Scripture, to whose interpretation the Jews
of Thessalonica were bound to stand, could be none: every one might
believe, or not believe, according as the allegation seemed to himself
to be agreeable, or not agreeable to the meaning of the places alleged.
And generally in all cases of the world, he that pretendeth any proof,
maketh judge of his proof him to whom he addresseth his speech. And as
to the case of the Jews in particular, they were bound by express words
(_Deut._ xvii.) to receive the determination of all hard questions, from
the priests and judges of Israel for the time being. But this is to be
understood of the Jews that were yet unconverted.

For the conversion of the Gentiles, there was no use of alleging the
Scriptures, which they believed not. The apostles therefore laboured by
reason to confute their idolatry; and that done, to persuade them to the
faith of Christ, by their testimony of his life and resurrection. So
that there could not yet be any controversy concerning the authority to
interpret Scripture; seeing no man was obliged, during his infidelity,
to follow any man’s interpretation of any Scripture, except his
sovereign’s interpretation of the laws of his country.

Let us now consider the conversion itself, and see what there was
therein that could be cause of such an obligation. Men were converted to
no other thing than to the belief of that which the apostles preached:
and the apostles preached nothing, but that Jesus was the Christ, that
is to say, the king that was to save them, and reign over them eternally
in the world to come; and consequently that he was not dead, but risen
again from the dead, and gone up into heaven, and should come again one
day to judge the world, (which also should rise again to be judged,) and
reward every man according to his works. None of them preached that
himself, or any other apostle, was such an interpreter of the Scripture,
as all that became Christians, ought to take their interpretation for
law. For to interpret the laws, is part of the administration of a
present kingdom; which the apostles had not. They prayed then, and all
other pastors ever since, _let thy kingdom come_; and exhorted their
converts to obey their then ethnic princes. The New Testament was not
yet published in one body. Every of the evangelists was interpreter of
his own gospel; and every apostle of his own epistle; and of the Old
Testament our Saviour himself saith to the Jews (_John_ v. 39) _Search
the Scriptures; for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are
they that testify of me_. If he had not meant they should interpret
them, he would not have bidden them take thence the proof of his being
the Christ: he would either have interpreted them himself, or referred
them to the interpretation of the priests.

When a difficulty arose, the apostles and elders of the Church assembled
themselves together, and determined what should be preached and taught,
and how they should interpret the Scriptures to the people; but took not
from the people the liberty to read and interpret them to themselves.
The apostles sent divers letters to the Churches, and other writings for
their instruction; which had been in vain, if they had not allowed them
to interpret, that is, to consider the meaning of them. And as it was in
the apostles’ time, it must be till such time as there should be
pastors, that could authorize an interpreter, whose interpretation
should generally be stood to: but that could not be till kings were
pastors, or pastors kings.

[Sidenote: Of the power to make Scripture, law.]

There be two senses, wherein a writing may be said to be _canonical_;
for _canon_, signifieth a _rule_; and a rule is a precept, by which a
man is guided and directed in any action whatsoever. Such precepts,
though given by a teacher to his disciple, or a counsellor to his
friend, without power to compel him to observe them, are nevertheless
canons; because they are rules. But when they are given by one, whom he
that receiveth them is bound to obey, then are those canons, not only
rules, but laws. The question therefore here, is of the power to make
the Scriptures, which are the rules of Christian faith, laws.

[Sidenote: Of the ten commandments.]

That part of the Scripture, which was first law, was the Ten
Commandments, written in two tables of stone, and delivered by God
himself to Moses; and by Moses made known to the people. Before that
time there was no written law of God, who as yet having not chosen any
people to be his peculiar kingdom, had given no law to men, but the law
of nature, that is to say, the precepts of natural reason, written in
every man’s own heart. Of these two tables, the first containeth the law
of sovereignty; 1. That they should not obey, nor honour the gods of
other nations, in these words, _Non habebis deos alienos coram me_, that
is, _thou shalt not have for gods, the gods that other nations worship,
but only me_: whereby they were forbidden to obey, or honour, as their
king and governor, any other God, than him that spake unto them then by
Moses, and afterwards by the high-priest. 2. That they _should not make
any image to represent him_; that is to say, they were not to choose to
themselves, neither in heaven, nor in earth, any representative of their
own fancying, but obey Moses and Aaron, whom he had appointed to that
office. 3. That _they should not take the name of God in vain_; that is,
they should not speak rashly of their king, nor dispute his right, nor
the commissions of Moses and Aaron, his lieutenants. 4. That _they
should every seventh day abstain from their ordinary labour_, and employ
that time in doing him public honour. The second table containeth the
duty of one man towards another, as _to honour parents_; _not to kill_;
_not to commit adultery_; _not to steal_; _not to corrupt judgment by
false witness_; and finally, _not so much as to design in their heart
the doing of any injury one to another_. The question now is, who it was
that gave to these written tables the obligatory force of laws. There is
no doubt but they were made laws by God himself: but because a law
obliges not, nor is law to any, but to them that acknowledge it to be
the act of the sovereign; how could the people of Israel, that were
forbidden to approach the mountain to hear what God said to Moses, be
obliged to obedience to all those laws which Moses propounded to them?
Some of them were indeed the laws of nature, as all the second table;
and therefore to be acknowledged for God’s laws; not to the Israelites
alone, but to all people: but of those that were peculiar to the
Israelites, as those of the first table, the question remains; saving
that they had obliged themselves, presently after the propounding of
them, to obey Moses, in these words (_Exod._ xx. 19), _Speak thou to us,
and we will hear thee; but let not God speak to us, lest we die_. It was
therefore only Moses then, and after him the high-priest, whom, by
Moses, God declared should administer this his peculiar kingdom, that
had on earth the power to make this short Scripture of the Decalogue to
be law in the commonwealth of Israel. But Moses, and Aaron, and the
succeeding high-priests, were the civil sovereigns. Therefore hitherto,
the canonizing or making the Scripture law, belonged to the civil
sovereign.

[Sidenote: Of the judicial and Levitical law.]

The judicial law, that is to say, the laws that God prescribed to the
magistrates of Israel for the rule of their administration of justice,
and of the sentences or judgments they should pronounce in pleas between
man and man; and the Levitical law, that is to say, the rule that God
prescribed touching the rites and ceremonies of the priests and Levites,
were all delivered to them by Moses only; and therefore also became
laws, by virtue of the same promise of obedience to Moses. Whether these
laws were then written, or not written, but dictated to the people by
Moses, after his being forty days with God in the Mount, by word of
mouth, is not expressed in the text; but they were all positive laws,
and equivalent to holy Scripture, and made canonical by Moses the civil
sovereign.

[Sidenote: The second law.]

After the Israelites were come into the plains of Moab over against
Jericho, and ready to enter into the land of promise, Moses to the
former laws added divers others; which therefore are called
_Deuteronomy_; that is, _second laws_. And are, (as it is written
_Deut._ xxix. 1) _the words of a covenant which the Lord commanded Moses
to make with the children of Israel, besides the covenant which he made
with them in Horeb_. For having explained those former laws, in the
beginning of the book of _Deuteronomy_, he addeth others, that begin at
the xiith chapter, and continue to the end of the xxvith of the same
book. This law (_Deut._ xxvii. 3) they were commanded to write upon
great stones plastered over, at their passing over Jordan: this law also
was written by Moses himself in a book, and delivered into the hands of
the _priests, and to the elders of Israel_ (_Deut._ xxxi. 9), and
commanded (verse 26) _to be put in the side of the ark_; for in the ark
itself was nothing but the _ten commandments_. This was the law, which
Moses (_Deut._ xvii. 18) commanded the kings of Israel should keep a
copy of: and this is the law, which having been long time lost, was
found again in the temple in the time of Josiah, and by his authority
received for the law of God. But both Moses at the writing, and Josiah
at the recovery thereof, had both of them the civil sovereignty.
Hitherto therefore the power of making Scripture canonical, was in the
civil sovereign.

Besides this book of the law, there was no other book, from the time of
Moses till after the Captivity, received amongst the Jews for the law of
God. For the prophets, except a few, lived in the time of the Captivity
itself; and the rest lived but a little before it; and were so far from
having their prophecies generally received for laws, as that their
persons were persecuted, partly by false prophets, and partly by the
kings which were seduced by them. And this book itself, which was
confirmed by Josiah for the law of God, and with it all the history of
the works of God, was lost in the captivity and sack of the city of
Jerusalem, as appears by that of _2 Esdras_, xiv. 21, _thy law is burnt;
therefore no man knoweth the things that are done of thee, or the works
that shall begin_. And before the captivity, between the time when the
law was lost, (which is not mentioned in the Scripture, but may probably
be thought to be the time of Rehoboam, when (_1 Kings_ xiv. 26) Shishak,
king of Egypt, took the spoil of the temple), and the time of Josiah
when it was found again, they had no written word of God, but ruled
according to their own discretion, or by the direction of such as each
of them esteemed prophets.

[Sidenote: The Old Testament when made canonical.]

From hence we may infer, that the Scriptures of the Old Testament, which
we have at this day, were not canonical nor a law unto the Jews, till
the renovation of their covenant with God at their return from the
captivity, and restoration of their commonwealth under Esdras. But from
that time forward they were accounted the law of the Jews, and for such
translated into Greek by seventy elders of Judea, and put into the
library of Ptolemy at Alexandria, and approved for the word of God. Now
seeing Esdras was the high-priest, and the high-priest was their civil
sovereign, it is manifest that the Scriptures were never made laws, but
by the sovereign civil power.

[Sidenote: The New Testament began to be canonical under Christian
           sovereigns.]

By the writings of the fathers that lived in the time before that the
Christian religion was received, and authorized by Constantine the
emperor, we may find, that the books we now have of the New Testament
were held by the Christians of that time, except a few, (in respect of
whose paucity the rest were called the Catholic Church, and others
heretics), for the dictates of the Holy Ghost, and consequently for the
canon or rule of faith: such was the reverence and opinion they had of
their teachers; as generally the reverence, that the disciples bear to
their first masters in all manner of doctrine they receive from them, is
not small. Therefore there is no doubt, but when St. Paul wrote to the
Churches he had converted; or any other apostle or disciple of Christ,
to those which had then embraced Christ; they received those their
writings for the true Christian doctrine. But in that time, when not the
power and authority of the teacher, but the faith of the hearer, caused
them to receive it, it was not the apostles that made their own writings
canonical, but every convert made them so to himself.

But the question here, is not what any Christian made a law or canon to
himself, which he might again reject by the same right he received it;
but what was so made a canon to them, as without injustice they could
not do any thing contrary thereunto. That the New Testament should in
this sense be canonical, that is to say a law, in any place where the
law of the commonwealth had not made it so, is contrary to the nature of
a law. For a law, as has been already shown, is the commandment of that
man or assembly, to whom we have given sovereign authority to make such
rules for the direction of our actions as he shall think fit, and to
punish us when we do any thing contrary to the same. When therefore any
other man shall offer unto us any other rules, which the sovereign ruler
hath not prescribed, they are but counsel and advice; which, whether
good or bad, he that is counselled, may without injustice refuse to
observe; and when contrary to the laws already established, without
injustice cannot observe, how good soever he conceiveth it to be. I say,
he cannot in this case observe the same in his actions, nor in his
discourse with other men; though he may without blame believe his
private teachers, and wish he had the liberty to practise their advice,
and that it were publicly received for law. For internal faith is in its
own nature invisible, and consequently exempted from all human
jurisdiction; whereas the words and actions that proceed from it, as
breaches of our civil obedience, are injustice both before God and man.
Seeing then our Saviour hath denied his kingdom to be in this world,
seeing he had said, he came not to judge, but to save the world, he hath
not subjected us to other laws than those of the commonwealth; that is,
the Jews to the law of Moses, which he saith (_Matth._ v. 17) he came
not to destroy, but to fulfil; and other nations to the laws of their
several sovereigns, and all men to the laws of nature; the observing
whereof, both he himself, and his apostles, have in their teaching
recommended to us, as a necessary condition of being admitted by him in
the last day into his eternal kingdom, wherein shall be protection, and
life everlasting. Seeing then our Saviour, and his apostles, left not
new laws to oblige us in this world, but new doctrine to prepare us for
the next; the books of the New Testament, which contain that doctrine,
until obedience to them was commanded by them that God had given power
to on earth to be legislators, were not obligatory canons, that is,
laws, but only good and safe advice, for the direction of sinners in the
way to salvation, which every man might take and refuse at his own
peril, without injustice.

Again, our Saviour Christ’s commission to his apostles and disciples,
was to proclaim his kingdom, not present, but to come; and to teach all
nations, and to baptize them that should believe; and to enter into the
houses of them that should receive them, and where they were not
received, to shake off the dust of their feet against them; but not to
call for fire from heaven to destroy them, nor to compel them to
obedience by the sword. In all which there is nothing of power, but of
persuasion. He sent them out as sheep unto wolves, not as kings to their
subjects. They had not in commission to make laws; but to obey, and
teach obedience to laws made; and consequently they could not make their
writings obligatory canons, without the help of the sovereign civil
power. And therefore the Scripture of the New Testament is there only
law, where the lawful civil power hath made it so. And there also the
king, or sovereign, maketh it a law to himself; by which he subjecteth
himself, not to the doctor or apostle that converted him, but to God
himself and his Son Jesus Christ, as immediately as did the apostles
themselves.

[Sidenote: Of the power of councils to make the Scriptures law.]

That which may seem to give the New Testament, in respect of those that
have embraced Christian doctrine, the force of laws, in the times and
places of persecution, is the decrees they made amongst themselves in
their synod. For we read (_Acts_ xv. 28) the style of the council of the
apostles, the elders, and the whole Church, in this manner; _It seemed
good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burthen
than these necessary things, &c_; which is a style that signifieth a
power to lay a burthen on them that had received their doctrine. Now _to
lay a burthen on another_, seemeth the same as _to oblige_; and
therefore the acts of that council were laws to the then Christians.
Nevertheless, they were no more laws than are these other precepts,
_Repent; be baptized; keep the commandments; believe the gospel; come
unto me; sell all that thou hast; give it to the poor_; and, _follow
me_; which are not commands, but invitations, and callings of men to
Christianity, like that of _Isaiah_ lv. 1; _Ho, every man that
thirsteth, come ye to the waters, come, and buy wine and milk without
money_. For first, the apostles’ power was no other than that of our
Saviour, to invite men to embrace the kingdom of God; which they
themselves acknowledged for a kingdom, not present, but to come; and
they that have no kingdom, can make no laws. And secondly, if their acts
of council were laws, they could not without sin be disobeyed. But we
read not any where, that they who received not the doctrine of Christ,
did therein sin; but that they died in their sins; that is, that their
sins against the laws to which they owed obedience, were not pardoned.
And those laws were the laws of nature, and the civil laws of the state,
whereto every Christian man had by pact submitted himself. And therefore
by the burthen, which the apostles might lay on such as they had
converted, are not to be understood laws, but conditions proposed to
those that sought salvation; which they might accept or refuse at their
own peril, without a new sin, though not without the hazard of being
condemned and excluded out of the kingdom of God for their sins past.
And therefore of infidels, St. John saith not, the wrath of God shall
_come_ upon them, but (_John_ iii. 36) _the wrath of God remaineth upon
them_; and not that they shall be condemned, but that (_John_ iii. 18)
_they are condemned already_. Nor can it be conceived, that the benefit
of faith _is remission of sins_, unless we conceive withal, that the
damage of infidelity _is the retention of the same sins_.

But to what end is it, may some man ask, that the apostles, and other
pastors of the Church after their time, should meet together to agree
upon what doctrine should be taught, both for faith and manners, if no
man were obliged to observe their decrees? To this may be answered, that
the apostles and elders of that council were obliged even by their
entrance into it, to teach the doctrine therein concluded and decreed to
be taught, so far forth, as no precedent law, to which they were obliged
to yield obedience, was to the contrary; but not that all other
Christians should be obliged to observe what they taught. For though
they might deliberate what each of them should teach; yet they could not
deliberate what others should do, unless their assembly had had a
legislative power; which none could have but civil sovereigns. For
though God be the sovereign of all the world, we are not bound to take
for his law whatsoever is propounded by every man in his name; nor
anything contrary to the civil law, which God hath expressly commanded
us to obey.

Seeing then the acts of council of the apostles, were then no laws, but
counsels; much less are laws the acts of any other doctors or council
since, if assembled without the authority of the civil sovereign. And
consequently, the Books of the New Testament, though most perfect rules
of Christian doctrine, could not be made laws by any other authority
than that of kings or sovereign assemblies.

The first council, that made the Scriptures we now have canon, is not
extant: for that collection of the canons of the apostles, attributed to
Clemens, the first bishop of Rome after St. Peter, is subject to
question. For though the canonical books be there reckoned up; yet these
words, _sint vobis omnibus clericis et laicis libri venerandi, etc._
contain a distinction of clergy and laity, that was not in use so near
St. Peter’s time. The first council for settling the canonical
Scripture, that is extant, is that of Laodicea, (_Can._ lix.) which
forbids the reading of other books than those in the churches; which is
a mandate that is not addressed to every Christian, but to those only
that had authority to read any thing publicly in the church; that is, to
ecclesiastics only.

[Sidenote: Of the right of constituting ecclesiastical officers in the
           time of the apostles.]

Of ecclesiastical officers in the time of the apostles, some were
magisterial, some ministerial. Magisterial were the offices of the
preaching of the gospel of the kingdom of God to infidels; of
administering the sacraments, and divine service; and of teaching the
rules of faith and manners to those that were converted. Ministerial was
the office of deacons, that is, of them that were appointed to the
administration of the secular necessities of the church, at such time as
they lived upon a common stock of money, raised out of the voluntary
contributions of the faithful.

Amongst the officers magisterial, the first and principal were the
apostles; whereof there were at first but twelve; and these were chosen
and constituted by our Saviour himself; and their office was not only to
preach, teach, and baptize, but also to be martyrs, witnesses of our
Saviour’s resurrection. This testimony was the specifical and essential
mark, whereby the apostleship was distinguished from other magistracy
ecclesiastical; as being necessary for an apostle, either to have seen
our Saviour after his resurrection, or to have conversed with him
before, and seen his works, and other arguments of his divinity; whereby
they might be taken for sufficient witnesses. And therefore at the
election of a new apostle in the place of Judas Iscariot, St. Peter
saith (_Acts_ i. 21, 22) _Of these men that have companied with us, all
the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst us, beginning from
the baptism of John unto that same day that he was taken up from us_,
must _one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection_:
where by this word _must_, is implied a necessary property of an
apostle, to have companied with the first and prime apostles, in the
time that our Saviour manifested himself in the flesh.

[Sidenote: Matthias made apostle by the congregation.]

The first apostle, of those which were not constituted by Christ in the
time he was upon the earth, was Matthias, chosen in this manner. There
were assembled together in Jerusalem about one hundred and twenty
Christians (_Acts_ i. 15). These (verse 23) appointed two, Joseph the
Just and Matthias, and caused lots to be drawn; _and_ (verse 26) _the
lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the apostles_. So that
here we see the ordination of this apostle was the act of the
congregation, and not of St. Peter nor of the eleven, otherwise than as
members of the assembly.

[Sidenote: Paul and Barnabas made apostles by the Church of Antioch.]

After him there was never any other apostle ordained, but Paul and
Barnabas; which was done as we read (_Acts_ xiii. 1, 2, 3) in this
manner. _There were in the Church that was at Antioch, certain prophets
and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius
of Cyrene, and Manaen; which had been brought up with Herod the
Tetrarch, and Saul. As they ministered unto the Lord, and fasted, the
Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I
have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their
hands on them, they sent them away._

By which it is manifest, that though they were called by the Holy Ghost,
their calling was declared unto them and their mission authorized by the
particular Church of Antioch. And that this their calling was to the
apostleship, is apparent by that, that they are both called (_Acts_ xiv.
14) apostles: and that it was by virtue of this act of the Church of
Antioch, that they were apostles, St. Paul declareth plainly (_Rom._ i.
1), in that he useth the word, which the Holy Ghost used at his calling:
for he styleth himself, _An apostle separated unto the gospel of God_;
alluding to the words of the Holy Ghost, _Separate me Barnabas and Saul,
&c._ But seeing the work of an apostle, was to be a witness of the
resurrection of Christ, a man may here ask, how St. Paul, that conversed
not with our Saviour before his passion, could know he was risen? To
which is easily answered, that our Saviour himself appeared to him in
the way to Damascus, from heaven, after his ascension; _and chose him
for a vessel to bear his name before the Gentiles, and kings, and
children of Israel_: and consequently, having seen the Lord after his
passion, he was a competent witness of his resurrection. And as for
Barnabas, he was a disciple before the passion. It is therefore evident
that Paul and Barnabas were apostles; and yet chosen and authorized, not
by the first apostles alone, but by the Church of Antioch; as Matthias
was chosen and authorized by the Church of Jerusalem.

[Sidenote: What offices in the church are magisterial.]

_Bishop_, a word formed in our language out of the Greek Επισκοπος,
signifieth an overseer or superintendent of any business, and
particularly a pastor or shepherd; and thence by metaphor was taken, not
only amongst the Jews that were originally shepherds, but also amongst
the heathen, to signify the office of a king, or any other ruler or
guide of people, whether he ruled by laws or doctrine. And so the
apostles were the first Christian bishops, instituted by Christ himself:
in which sense the apostleship of Judas is called (_Acts_ i. 20) _his
bishopric_. And afterwards, when there were constituted elders in the
Christian Churches, with charge to guide Christ’s flock by their
doctrine and advice; these elders were also called bishops. Timothy was
an elder, (which word _elder_, in the New Testament, is a name of
office, as well as of age); yet he was also a bishop. And bishops were
then content with the title of elders. Nay St. John himself, the apostle
beloved of our Lord, beginneth his second Epistle with these words, _The
elder to the elect lady_. By which it is evident, that _bishop_,
_pastor_, _elder_, _doctor_, that is to say, _teacher_, were but so many
divers names of the same office in the time of the apostles; for there
was then no government by coercion, but only by doctrine and persuading.
The kingdom of God was yet to come, in a new world: so that there could
be no authority to compel in any Church, till the commonwealth had
embraced the Christian faith: and consequently no diversity of
authority, though there were diversity of employments.

Besides these magisterial employments in the Church, namely, apostles,
bishops, elders, pastors, and doctors, whose calling was to proclaim
Christ to the Jews and infidels, and to direct and to teach those that
believed, we read in the New Testament of no other. For by the names of
_evangelists_ and _prophets_, is not signified any office, but several
gifts, by which several men were profitable to the Church: as
evangelists, by writing the life and acts of our Saviour, such as were
St. Matthew and St. John apostles, and St. Mark and St. Luke disciples,
and whosoever else wrote of that subject, (as St. Thomas, and St.
Barnabas are said to have done, though the Church have not received the
books that have gone under their names): and as prophets, by the gift of
interpreting the Old Testament, and sometimes by declaring their special
revelations to the Church. For neither these gifts, nor the gifts of
languages, nor the gift of casting out devils, nor of curing other
diseases, nor any thing else, did make an officer in the Church, save
only the due calling and election to the charge of teaching.

[Sidenote: Ordination of teachers.]

As the apostles, Matthias, Paul, and Barnabas, were not made by our
Saviour himself, but were elected by the Church, that is, by the
assembly of Christians; namely, Matthias by the Church of Jerusalem, and
Paul and Barnabas by the Church of Antioch; so were also the
_presbyters_ and _pastors_ in other cities, elected by the Churches of
those cities. For proof whereof let us consider, first, how St. Paul
proceeded in the ordination of presbyters, in the cities where he had
converted men to the Christian faith, immediately after he and Barnabas
had received their apostleship. We read (_Acts_ xiv. 23) that _they
ordained elders in every Church_; which at first sight may be taken for
an argument, that they themselves chose, and gave them their authority:
but if we consider the original text, it will be manifest that they were
authorized and chosen by the assembly of the Christians of each city.
For the words there are, χειροτονήσαντες ἀυτοῖς πρεσβυτέρους κατ’
ἐκκλησίαν, that is, _when they had ordained them elders by the holding
up of hands in every congregation_. Now it is well enough known, that in
all those cities the manner of choosing magistrates and officers, was by
plurality of suffrages; and, because the ordinary way of distinguishing
the affirmative votes from the negatives, was by holding up of hands, to
ordain an officer in any of the cities, was no more but to bring the
people together, to elect them by plurality of votes, whether it were by
plurality of elevated hands, or by plurality of voices, or plurality of
balls, or beans, or small stones, of which every man cast in one, into a
vessel marked for the affirmative or negative; for divers cities had
divers customs in that point. It was therefore the assembly that elected
their own elders: the apostles were only presidents of the assembly, to
call them together for such election, and to pronounce them elected, and
to give them the benediction which now is called consecration. And for
this cause, they that were presidents of the assemblies, as in the
absence of the apostles the elders were, were called προεστῶτες, and in
Latin _antistites_; which words signify the principal person of the
assembly, whose office was to number the votes, and to declare thereby
who was chosen; and where the votes were equal, to decide the matter in
question, by adding his own; which is the office of a president in
council. And, because all the Churches had their presbyters ordained in
the same manner, where the word is _constitute_, (as _Titus_ i. 5) ἵνα
καταστησης κατα πόλιν πρεσβυτέρους, _For this cause left I thee in
Crete, that thou shouldest constitute elders in every city_, we are to
understand the same thing, namely, that he should call the faithful
together, and ordain them presbyters by plurality of suffrages. It had
been a strange thing, if in a town, where men perhaps had never seen any
magistrate otherwise chosen than by an assembly, those of the town
becoming Christians should so much as have thought on any other way of
election of their teachers and guides, that is to say, of their
presbyters, (otherwise called bishops) than this of plurality of
suffrages, intimated by St. Paul (_Acts_ xiv. 23) in the word
χειροτονήσαντες. Nor was there ever any choosing of bishops, before the
emperors found it necessary to regulate them, in order to the keeping of
the peace amongst them, but by the assemblies of the Christians in every
several town.

The same is also confirmed by the continual practice, even to this day,
in the election of the bishops of Rome. For if the bishop of any place
had the right of choosing another, to the succession of the pastoral
office, in any city, at such times as he went from thence to plant the
same in another place; much more had he had the right to appoint his
successors in that place, in which he last resided and died: and we find
not that ever any bishop of Rome appointed his successor. For they were
a long time chosen by the people, as we may see by the sedition raised
about the election between _Damasus_ and _Ursicinus_; which Ammianus
Marcellinus saith was so great, that _Juventius_ the præfect, unable to
keep the peace between them, was forced to go out of the city; and that
there were above an hundred men found dead upon that occasion in the
church itself. And though they afterwards were chosen, first, by the
whole clergy of Rome, and afterwards by the cardinals; yet never any was
appointed to the succession by his predecessor. If therefore they
pretended no right to appoint their own successors, I think I may
reasonably conclude they had no right to appoint the successors of other
bishops, without receiving some new power; which none could take from
the Church to bestow on them, but such as had a lawful authority, not
only to teach, but to command the Church; which none could do, but the
civil sovereign.

[Sidenote: Ministers of the Church, what.]

The word _minister_, in the original Διάκονος, signifieth one that
voluntarily doth the business of another man; and differeth from a
servant only in this, that servants are obliged by their condition, to
do what is commanded them; whereas ministers are obliged only by their
undertaking, and bound therefore to no more than that they have
undertaken: so that both they that teach the word of God, and they that
administer the secular affairs of the Church, are both ministers, but
they are ministers of different persons. For the pastors of the Church,
called (_Acts_ vi. 4) _the ministers of the word_, are ministers of
Christ, whose word it is: but the ministry of a deacon, which is called
(verse 2 of the same chapter) _serving of tables_, is a service done to
the Church or congregation: so that neither any one man, nor the whole
church, could ever of their pastor say, he was their minister: but of a
deacon, whether the charge he undertook were to serve tables, or
distribute maintenance to the Christians, when they lived in each city
on a common stock or upon collections, as in the first times, or to take
a care of the house of prayer, or of the revenue, or other worldly
business of the Church, the whole congregation might properly call him
their minister.

For their employment, as deacons, was to serve the congregation; though
upon occasion they omitted not to preach the gospel, and maintain the
doctrine of Christ, every one according to his gifts, as St. Stephen
did; and both to preach and baptize, as Philip did. For that Philip,
which (_Acts_ viii. 5) preached the gospel at Samaria, and (verse 38)
baptized the Eunuch, was Philip the deacon, not Philip the apostle. For
it is manifest (verse 1) that when Philip preached in Samaria, the
apostles were at Jerusalem, and (verse 14) _when they heard that Samaria
had received the word of God, sent Peter and John to them_; by
imposition of whose hands, they that were baptized (verse 15), received,
which before by the baptism of Philip they had not received, the Holy
Ghost. For it was necessary for the conferring of the Holy Ghost, that
their baptism should be administered or confirmed by a minister of the
word, not by a minister of the Church. And therefore to confirm the
baptism of those that Philip the deacon had baptized, the apostles sent
out of their own number from Jerusalem to Samaria, Peter and John; who
conferred on them that before were but baptized, those graces that were
signs of the Holy Spirit, which at that time did accompany all true
believers; which what they were may be understood by that which St. Mark
saith (chap. xvi. 17), _these signs follow them that believe in my name;
they shall cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they
shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not
hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover_.
This to do, was it that Philip could not give; but the apostles could,
and, as appears by this place, effectually did to every man that truly
believed and was by a minister of Christ himself baptized: which power
either Christ’s ministers in this age cannot confer, or else there are
very few true believers, or Christ hath very few ministers.

[Sidenote: And how chosen.]

That the first deacons were chosen, not by the apostles, but by a
congregation of the disciples, that is, of Christian men of all sorts,
is manifest out of _Acts_ vi, where we read that the _Twelve_, after the
number of disciples was multiplied, called them together, and having
told them, that it was not fit that the apostles should leave the word
of God and serve tables, said unto them, (verse 3) _Brethren, look you
out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and of
wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business_. Here it is manifest,
that though the apostles declared them elected; yet the congregation
chose them; which also (verse 5) is more expressly said, where it is
written, that _the saying pleased the whole multitude, and they chose
seven, &c._

[Sidenote: Of ecclesiastical revenue, under the law of Moses.]

Under the Old Testament, the tribe of Levi were only capable of the
priesthood, and other inferior offices of the Church. The land was
divided amongst the other tribes, Levi excepted, which, by the
subdivision of the tribe of Joseph into Ephraim and Manasseh, were still
twelve. To the tribe of Levi were assigned certain cities for their
habitation, with the suburbs for their cattle: but for their portion,
they were to have the tenth of the fruits of the land of their brethren.
Again, the priests for their maintenance had the tenth of that tenth,
together with part of the oblations and sacrifices. For God had said to
Aaron (_Numb._ xviii. 20) _Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land;
neither shalt thou have any part amongst them; I am thy part and thine
inheritance amongst the children of Israel_. For God being then king,
and having constituted the tribe of Levi to be his public ministers, he
allowed them for their maintenance the public revenue, that is to say,
the part that God had reserved to himself; which were tithes and
offerings: and that is it which is meant, where God saith, _I am thine
inheritance_. And therefore to the Levites might not unfitly be
attributed the name of _clergy_, from κλῆρος, which signifieth lot or
inheritance; not that they were heirs of the kingdom of God, more than
other; but that God’s inheritance was their maintenance. Now, seeing in
this time God himself was their king, and Moses, Aaron, and the
succeeding high-priests, were his lieutenants; it is manifest, that the
right of tithes and offerings was constituted by the civil power.

After their rejection of God in the demanding of a king, they enjoyed
still the same revenue; but the right thereof was derived from that,
that the kings did never take it from them: for the public revenue was
at the disposing of him that was the public person; and that, till the
Captivity, was the king. And again, after the return from the Captivity,
they paid their tithes as before to the priest. Hitherto therefore
Church livings were determined by the civil sovereign.

[Sidenote: In our Saviour’s time, and after.]

Of the maintenance of our Saviour and his apostles, we read only they
had a purse, which was carried by Judas Iscariot; and that of the
apostles, such as were fishermen did sometimes use their trade; and that
when our Saviour sent the twelve apostles to preach, he forbad them
(_Matth._ x. 9, 10): _to carry gold, and silver, and brass in their
purses, for that the workman is worthy of his hire_. By which it is
probable, their ordinary maintenance was not unsuitable to their
employment; for their employment was (verse 8) _freely to give, because
they had freely received_; and their maintenance was the _free gift_ of
those that believed the good tiding they carried about of the coming of
the Messiah their Saviour. To which we may add, that which was
contributed out of gratitude by such as our Saviour had healed of
diseases; of which are mentioned (_Luke_ viii. 2, 3) _Certain women
which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities; Mary Magdalen,
out of whom went seven devils; and Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod’s
steward, and Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto him of
their substance_.

After our Saviour’s ascension, the Christians of every city lived in
common (_Acts_ iv. 34,35) upon the money which was made of the sale of
their lands and possessions, and laid down at the feet of the apostles,
of good will, not of duty; for, _whilst the land remained_, saith St.
Peter to Ananias (_Acts_ v. 4), _was it not thine? and after it was
sold, was it not in thy power?_ which sheweth he needed not have saved
his land nor his money by lying, as not being bound to contribute any
thing at all, unless he had pleased. And as in the time of the apostles,
so also all the time downward, till after Constantine the Great, we
shall find that the maintenance of the bishops and pastors of the
Christian Church was nothing but the voluntary contribution of them that
had embraced their doctrine. There was yet no mention of tithes: but
such was in the time of Constantine and his sons the affection of
Christians to their pastors, as Ammianus Marcellinus saith, describing
the sedition of Damasus and Ursicinus about the bishopric, that it was
worth their contention, in that the bishops of those times, by the
liberality of their flock, and especially of matrons, lived splendidly,
were carried in coaches, and were sumptuous in their fare and apparel.

[Sidenote: The ministers of the Gospel lived on the benevolence of their
           flocks.]

But here may some ask, whether the pastors were then bound to live upon
voluntary contribution, as upon alms; _For who_, saith St. Paul (_1
Cor._ ix. 7) _goeth to war at his own charges? or who feedeth a flock,
and eateth not of the milk of the flock?_ And again, (verse 13) _Do ye
not know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things
of the temple; and they which wait at the altar, partake with the
altar_; that is to say, have part of that which is offered at the altar
for their maintenance? And then he concludeth, (verse 14) _Even so hath
the Lord appointed, that they which preach the gospel should live of the
gospel_. From which place may be inferred indeed, that the pastors of
the Church ought to be maintained by their flocks; but not that the
pastors were to determine, either the quantity, or the kind of their own
allowance, and be, as it were, their own carvers. Their allowance must
needs therefore be determined, either by the gratitude and liberality of
every particular man of their flock, or by the whole congregation. By
the whole congregation it could not be, because their acts were then no
laws; therefore the maintenance of pastors before emperors and civil
sovereigns had made laws to settle it, was nothing but benevolence. They
that served at the altar lived on what was offered. So may the pastors
also take what is offered them by their flock; but not exact what is not
offered. In what court should they sue for it, who had no tribunals? Or,
if they had arbitrators amongst themselves, who should execute their
judgments, when they had no power to arm their officers? It remaineth,
therefore, that there could be no certain maintenance assigned to any
pastors of the Church, but by the whole congregation; and then only,
when their decrees should have the force, not only of _canons_, but also
of _laws_; which laws could not be made, but by emperors, kings, or
other civil sovereigns. The right of tithes in Moses’ law, could not be
applied to the then ministers of the gospel; because Moses and the
high-priests were the civil sovereigns of the people under God, whose
kingdom amongst the Jews was present; whereas the kingdom of God by
Christ is yet to come.

Hitherto hath been shewn what the pastors of the Church are; what are
the points of their commission, as that they were to preach, to teach,
to baptize, to be presidents in their several congregations; what is
ecclesiastical censure, viz. excommunication, that is to say, in those
places where Christianity was forbidden by the civil laws, a putting of
themselves out of the company of the excommunicate, and where
Christianity was by the civil law commanded, a putting the excommunicate
out of the congregations of Christians; who elected the pastors and
ministers of the Church, that it was the congregation; who consecrated
and blessed them, that it was the pastor; what was their due revenue,
that it was none but their own possessions, and their own labour, and
the voluntary contributions of devout and grateful Christians. We are to
consider now, what office in the Church those persons have, who being
civil sovereigns, have embraced also the Christian faith.

[Sidenote: That the civil sovereign, being a Christian, hath the right
           of appointing pastors.]

And first, we are to remember, that the right of judging what doctrines
are fit for peace, and to be taught the subjects, is in all
commonwealths inseparably annexed, as hath been already proved (chapter
XVIII.), to the sovereign power civil, whether it be in one man, or in
one assembly of men. For it is evident to the meanest capacity, that
men’s actions are derived from the opinions they have of the good or
evil, which from those actions redound unto themselves; and
consequently, men that are once possessed of an opinion, that their
obedience to the sovereign power will be more hurtful to them than their
disobedience, will disobey the laws, and thereby overthrow the
commonwealth, and introduce confusion and civil war; for the avoiding
whereof, all civil government was ordained. And therefore in all
commonwealths of the heathen, the sovereigns have had the name of
pastors of the people, because there was no subject that could lawfully
teach the people, but by their permission and authority.

This right of the heathen kings cannot be thought taken from them by
their conversion to the faith of Christ; who never ordained that kings,
for believing in him, should be deposed, that is, subjected to any but
himself, or, which is all one, be deprived of the power necessary for
the conservation of peace amongst their subjects, and for their defence
against foreign enemies. And therefore Christian kings are still the
supreme pastors of their people, and have power to ordain what pastors
they please, to teach the Church, that is, to teach the people committed
to their charge.

Again, let the right of choosing them be, as before the conversion of
kings, in the Church; for so it was in the time of the apostles
themselves, as hath been shown already in this chapter; even so also the
right will be in the civil sovereign, Christian. For in that he is a
Christian, he allows the teaching; and in that he is the sovereign,
which is as much as to say, the Church by representation, the teachers
he elects are elected by the Church. And when an assembly of Christians
choose their pastor in a Christian commonwealth, it is the sovereign
that electeth him, because it is done by his authority; in the same
manner, as when a town choose their mayor, it is the act of him that
hath the sovereign power: for every act done, is the act of him, without
whose consent it is invalid. And therefore whatsoever examples may be
drawn out of history, concerning the election of pastors by the people,
or by the clergy, they are no arguments against the right of any civil
sovereign, because they that elected them did it by his authority.

Seeing then in every Christian commonwealth, the civil sovereign is the
supreme pastor, to whose charge the whole flock of his subjects is
committed, and consequently that it is by his authority that all other
pastors are made, and have power to teach, and perform all other
pastoral offices; it followeth also, that it is from the civil sovereign
that all other pastors derive their right of teaching, preaching, and
other functions pertaining to that office, and that they are but his
ministers; in the same manner as the magistrates of towns, judges in
courts of justice, and commanders of armies, are all but ministers of
him that is the magistrate of the whole commonwealth, judge of all
causes, and commander of the whole militia, which is always the civil
sovereign. And the reason hereof, is not because they that teach, but
because they that are to learn, are his subjects. For let it be
supposed, that a Christian king commit the authority of ordaining
pastors in his dominions to another king, as divers Christian kings
allow that power to the Pope; he doth not thereby constitute a pastor
over himself, nor a sovereign pastor over his people; for that were to
deprive himself of the civil power; which, depending on the opinion men
have of their duty to him and the fear they have of punishment in
another world, would depend also on the skill and loyalty of doctors,
who are no less subject, not only to ambition, but also to ignorance,
than any other sort of men. So that where a stranger hath authority to
appoint teachers, it is given him by the sovereign in whose dominions he
teacheth. Christian doctors are our schoolmasters to Christianity; but
kings are fathers of families, and may receive schoolmasters for their
subjects from the recommendation of a stranger, but not from the
command; especially when the ill teaching them shall redound to the
great and manifest profit of him that recommends them: nor can they be
obliged to retain them, longer than it is for the public good; the care
of which they stand so long charged withal, as they retain any other
essential right of the sovereignty.

[Sidenote: The pastoral authority of sovereigns only is _jure divino_;
           that of other pastors is _jure civili_.]

If a man therefore should ask a pastor, in the execution of his office,
as the chief-priests and elders of the people (_Matth._ xxi. 23) asked
our Saviour, _By what authority doest thou these things, and who gave
thee this authority?_ he can make no other just answer, but that he doth
it by the authority of the commonwealth, given him by the king, or
assembly that representeth it. All pastors, except the supreme, execute
their charges in the right, that is by the authority of the civil
sovereign, that is, _jure civili_. But the king, and every other
sovereign, executeth his office of supreme pastor by immediate authority
from God, that is to say, in _God’s right_ or _jure divino_. And
therefore none but kings can put into their titles a mark of their
submission to God only, _Dei gratiâ rex_, &c. Bishops ought to say in
the beginning of their mandates, _By the favour of the King’s Majesty,
bishop of such a diocese_; or as civil ministers, _in His Majesty’s
name_. For in saying, _Divinâ providentiâ_, which is the same with _Dei
gratiâ_, though disguised, they deny to have received their authority
from the civil state; and slily slip off the collar of their civil
subjection, contrary to the unity and defence of the commonwealth.

[Sidenote: Christian kings have power to execute all manner of pastoral
           function.]

But if every Christian sovereign be the supreme pastor of his own
subjects, it seemeth that he hath also the authority, not only to
preach, which perhaps no man will deny, but also to baptize and to
administer the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper: and to consecrate both
temples and pastors to God’s service; which most men deny; partly
because they use not to do it, and partly because the administration of
sacraments, and consecration of persons and places to holy uses,
requireth the imposition of such men’s hands, as by the like imposition
successively from the time of the apostles have been ordained to the
like ministry. For proof therefore that Christian kings have power to
baptize, and to consecrate, I am to render a reason, both why they use
not to do it, and how, without the ordinary ceremony of imposition of
hands, they are made capable of doing it when they will.

There is no doubt but any king, in case he were skilful in the sciences,
might by the same right of his office read lectures of them himself, by
which he authorizeth others to read them in the universities.
Nevertheless, because the care of the sum of the business of the
commonwealth taketh up his whole time, it were not convenient for him to
apply himself in person to that particular. A king may also, if he
please, sit in judgment to hear and determine all manner of causes, as
well as give others authority to do it in his name; but that the charge,
that lieth upon him of command and government, constrain him to be
continually at the helm, and to commit the ministerial offices to others
under him. In the like manner our Saviour, who surely had power to
baptize, baptized none (_John_ iv. 2) himself, but sent his apostles and
disciples to baptize. So also St. Paul, by the necessity of preaching in
divers and far distant places, baptized few: amongst all the Corinthians
he baptized only (_1 Cor._ i. 14, 16,) Crispus, Gaius, and Stephanas;
and the reason was, (_1 Cor._ i. 17) because his principal charge was to
preach. Whereby it is manifest, that the greater charge, such as is the
government of the Church, is a dispensation for the less. The reason
therefore why Christian kings use not to baptize, is evident, and the
same for which at this day there are few baptized by bishops, and by the
Pope fewer.

And as concerning imposition of hands, whether it be needful for the
authorising of a king to baptize and consecrate, we may consider thus:

Imposition of hands, was a most ancient public ceremony amongst the
Jews, by which was designed, and made certain, the person, or other
thing intended in a man’s prayer, blessing, sacrifice, consecration,
condemnation, or other speech. So Jacob, in blessing the children of
Joseph (_Gen._ xlviii. 14), _Laid his right hand on Ephraim the younger,
and his left hand on Manasseh the first born_; and this he did
_wittingly_ (though they were so presented to him by Joseph, as he was
forced in doing it to stretch out his arms across) to design to whom he
intended the greater blessing. So also in the sacrificing of the burnt
offering, Aaron is commanded (_Exod._ xxix. 10) _to lay his hands on the
head of the bullock_: and (verse 15) _to lay his hand on the head of the
ram_. The same is also said again _Levit._ i. 4, and viii. 14. Likewise
Moses, when he ordained Joshua to be captain of the Israelites, that is,
consecrated him to God’s service, (_Numb._ xxvii. 23) _Laid his hands
upon him, and gave him his charge_, designing and rendering certain, who
it was they were to obey in war. And in the consecration of the Levites
(_Numb._ viii. 10), God commanded that _the children of Israel should
put their hands upon the Levites_. And in the condemnation of him that
had blasphemed the Lord (_Levit._ xxiv. 14), God commanded that _all
that heard him should lay their hands on his head, and that all the
congregation should stone him_. And why should they only that heard him,
lay their hands upon him, and not rather a priest, Levite, or other
minister of justice, but that none else were able to design and to
demonstrate to the eyes of the congregation, who it was that had
blasphemed and ought to die? And to design a man or any other thing, by
the hand to the eye, is less subject to mistake, than when it is done to
the ear by a name.

And so much was this ceremony observed, that in blessing the whole
congregation at once, which cannot be done by laying on of hands, yet
Aaron (_Levit._ ix. 22) _did lift up his hands toward the people when he
blessed them_. And we read also of the like ceremony of consecration of
temples amongst the heathen, as that the priest laid his hands on some
post of the temple, all the while he was uttering the words of
consecration. So natural it is to design any individual thing, rather by
the hand, to assure the eyes, than by words to inform the ear, in
matters of God’s public service.

This ceremony was not therefore new in our Saviour’s time. For Jairus
(_Mark_ v. 23), whose daughter was sick, besought our Saviour, not to
heal her, but _to lay his hands upon her that she might be healed_. And
(_Matthew_ xix. 13) _they brought unto him little children, that he
should put his hands on them, and pray_.

According to this ancient rite, the apostles, and presbyters, and the
presbytery itself, laid hands on them whom they ordained pastors, and
withal prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost; and that
not only once, but sometimes oftener, when a new occasion was presented:
but the end was still the same, namely a punctual and religious
designation of the person, ordained either to the pastoral charge in
general, or to a particular mission. So (_Acts_ vi. 6) _The apostles
prayed, and laid their hands_ on the seven deacons; which was done, not
to give them the Holy Ghost, (for they were full of the Holy Ghost
before they were chosen, as appeareth immediately before, verse 3) but
to design them to that office. And after Philip the deacon had converted
certain persons in Samaria, Peter and John went down (_Acts_ viii. 17),
_and laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost_. And
not only an apostle, but a presbyter had this power: for St. Paul
adviseth Timothy (_1 Tim._ v. 22) _Lay hands suddenly on no man_; that
is, design no man rashly to the office of a pastor. The whole presbytery
laid their hands on Timothy, as we read _1 Tim._ iv. 14: but this is to
be understood, as that some did it by the appointment of the presbytery,
and most likely their προεστὼς, or prolocutor, which it may be was St.
Paul himself. For in his second Epistle to _Timothy_, (chap. i. 6) he
saith to him, _Stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the laying
on of my hands_: where note by the way, that by the Holy Ghost, is not
meant the third person in the Trinity, but the gifts necessary to the
pastoral office. We read also, that St. Paul had imposition of hands
twice; once from Ananias at Damascus, (_Acts_ ix. 17, 18) at the time of
his baptism; and again (_Acts_ xiii. 3) at Antioch, when he was first
sent out to preach. The use then of this ceremony, considered in the
ordination of pastors, was to design the person to whom they gave such
power. But if there had been then any Christian, that had had the power
of teaching before; the baptizing of him, that is, the making him a
Christian, had given him no new power, but had only caused him to preach
true doctrine, that is, to use his power aright; and therefore the
imposition of hands had been unnecessary; baptism itself had been
sufficient. But every sovereign, before Christianity, had the power of
teaching, and ordaining teachers; and therefore Christianity gave them
no new right, but only directed them in the way of teaching truth; and
consequently they needed no imposition of hands, besides that which is
done in baptism, to authorize them to exercise any part of the pastoral
function, as namely, to baptize and consecrate. And in the Old
Testament, though the priest only had right to consecrate, during the
time that the sovereignty was in the high-priest; yet it was not so when
the sovereignty was in the king. For we read (_1 Kings_ viii.) that
Solomon blessed the people, consecrated the Temple, and pronounced that
public prayer which is the pattern now for consecration of all Christian
churches and chapels: whereby it appears, he had not only the right of
ecclesiastical government, but also of exercising ecclesiastical
functions.

[Sidenote: The civil sovereign, if a Christian, is head of the Church in
           his own dominions.]

From this consolidation of the right politic and ecclesiastic in
Christian sovereigns, it is evident, they have all manner of power over
their subjects, that can be given to man, for the government of men’s
external actions, both in policy and religion; and may make such laws as
themselves shall judge fittest, for the government of their own
subjects, both as they are the commonwealth, and as they are the Church;
for both State and Church are the same men.

If they please, therefore, they may, as many Christian kings now do,
commit the government of their subjects in matters of religion to the
Pope; but then the Pope is in that point subordinate to them, and
exerciseth that charge in another’s dominion _jure civili_, in the right
of the civil sovereign; not _jure divino_, in God’s right; and may
therefore be discharged of that office, when the sovereign, for the good
of his subjects, shall think it necessary. They may also, if they
please, commit the care of religion to one supreme pastor, or to an
assembly of pastors; and give them what power over the Church, or one
over another, they think most convenient; and what titles of honour, as
of archbishops, bishops, priests, or presbyters, they will; and make
such laws for their maintenance, either by tithes or otherwise, as they
please, so they do it out of a sincere conscience, of which God only is
the judge. It is the civil sovereign that is to appoint judges and
interpreters of the canonical Scriptures; for it is he that maketh them
laws. It is he also that giveth strength to excommunications; which but
for such laws and punishments, as may humble obstinate libertines, and
reduce them to union with the rest of the Church, would be contemned. In
sum, he hath the supreme power in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as
civil, as far as concerneth actions and words, for those only are known
and may be accused; and of that which cannot be accused, there is no
judge at all but God, that knoweth the heart. And these rights are
incident to all sovereigns, whether monarchs or assemblies: for they
that are the representants of a Christian people, are representants of
the Church: for a Church, and a commonwealth of Christian people, are
the same thing.

[Sidenote: Cardinal Bellarmine’s books, _De Summo Pontifice_
           considered.]

Though this that I have here said, and in other places of this book,
seem clear enough for the asserting of the supreme ecclesiastical power
to Christian sovereigns; yet because the Pope of Rome’s challenge to
that power universally, hath been maintained chiefly, and I think, as
strongly as is possible, by Cardinal Bellarmine, in his controversy _De
Summo Pontifice_; I have thought it necessary, as briefly as I can, to
examine the grounds and strength of his discourse.

[Sidenote: The first book.]

Of five books he hath written of this subject, the first containeth
three questions: one, which is simply the best government, _Monarchy_,
_Aristocracy_, or _Democracy_; and concludeth for neither, but for a
government mixed of all three: another, which of these is the best
government of the Church; and concludeth for the mixed, but which should
most participate of monarchy: the third, whether in this mixed monarchy,
St. Peter had the place of monarch. Concerning his first conclusion, I
have already sufficiently proved (chapter XVIII.) that all governments
which men are bound to obey, are simple and absolute. In monarchy there
is but one man supreme; and all other men that have any kind of power in
the state, have it by his commission, during his pleasure, and execute
it in his name: and in aristocracy and democracy, but one supreme
assembly, with the same power that in monarchy belongeth to the monarch,
which is not a mixed, but an absolute sovereignty. And of the three
sorts, which is the best, is not to be disputed, where any one of them
is already established; but the present ought always to be preferred,
maintained, and accounted best; because it is against both the law of
nature, and the divine positive law, to do anything tending to the
subversion thereof. Besides, it maketh nothing to the power of any
pastor, unless he have the civil sovereignty, what kind of government is
the best; because their calling is not to govern men by commandment, but
to teach them, and persuade them by arguments, and leave it to them to
consider whether they shall embrace, or reject the doctrine taught. For
monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, do mark out unto us three sorts of
sovereigns, not of pastors; or, as we may say, three sorts of masters of
families, not three sorts of schoolmasters for their children.

And therefore the second conclusion, concerning the best form of
government of the Church, is nothing to the question of the Pope’s power
without his own dominions. For in all other commonwealths his power, if
he have any at all, is that of the schoolmaster only, and not of the
master of the family.

For the third conclusion, which is, that St. Peter was monarch of the
Church, he bringeth for his chief argument the place of St. Matthew
(chap. xvi. 18, 19) _Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
Church, &c. And I will give thee the keys of heaven; whatsoever thou
shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven._ Which place, well
considered, proveth no more, but that the Church of Christ hath for
foundation one only article; namely, that which Peter in the name of all
the apostles professing, gave occasion to our Saviour to speak the words
here cited. Which that we may clearly understand, we are to consider,
that our Saviour preached by himself, by John the Baptist, and by his
apostles, nothing but this article of faith, _that he was the Christ_;
all other articles requiring faith no otherwise, than as founded on
that. John began first, (_Matth._ iii. 2) preaching only this, _the
kingdom of God is at hand_. Then our Saviour himself (_Matth._ iv. 17)
preached the same: and to his twelve apostles, when he gave them their
commission, (_Matth._ x. 7), there is no mention of preaching any other
article but that. This was the fundamental article, that is the
foundation of the Church’s faith. Afterwards the apostles being returned
to him, he (_Matth._ xvi. 13) asketh them all, not Peter only, _who men
said he was_; and they answered, that _some said he was John the
Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremiah, or one of the Prophets_. Then
(verse 15) he asked them all again, not Peter only, _whom say ye that I
am?_ Therefore St. Peter answered for them all, _Thou art Christ, the
Son of the living God_; which I said is the foundation of the faith of
the whole Church; from which our Saviour takes the occasion of saying,
_upon this stone I will build my Church_: by which it is manifest, that
by the foundation-stone of the Church, was meant the fundamental article
of the Church’s faith. But why then, will some object, doth our Saviour
interpose these words, _thou art Peter_? If the original of this text
had been rigidly translated, the reason would easily have appeared. We
are therefore to consider, that the apostle Simon was surnamed _Stone_,
which is the signification of the Syriac word _Cephas_, and of the Greek
word Πετρος. Our Saviour therefore, after the confession of that
fundamental article, alluding to his name, said (as if it were in
English) thus, Thou art _Stone_, and upon this Stone I will build my
Church: which is as much as to say, this article, that _I am the
Christ_, is the foundation of all the faith I require in those that are
to be members of my Church. Neither is this allusion to a name, an
unusual thing in common speech. But it had been a strange and obscure
speech, if our Saviour, intending to build his Church on the person of
St. Peter, had said, _thou art a stone, and upon this stone I will build
my Church_; when it was so obvious, without ambiguity, to have said, _I
will build my Church on thee_; and yet there had been still the same
allusion to his name.

And for the following words, _I will give thee the keys of heaven, &c._
it is no more than what our Saviour gave also to all the rest of his
disciples, (_Matth._ xviii. 18), _Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall
be loosed in heaven_. But howsoever this be interpreted, there is no
doubt but the power here granted belongs to all supreme pastors; such as
are all Christian civil sovereigns in their own dominions. In so much,
as if St. Peter, or our Saviour himself, had converted any of them to
believe him, and to acknowledge his kingdom; yet, because his kingdom is
not of this world, he had left the supreme care of converting his
subjects to none but him; or else he must have deprived him of the
sovereignty, to which the right of teaching is inseparably annexed. And
thus much in refutation of his first book, wherein he would prove St.
Peter to have been the monarch universal of the Church, that is to say,
of all the Christians in the world.

[Sidenote: The second book.]

The second book hath two conclusions: one, that St. Peter was bishop of
Rome, and there died: the other, that the Popes of Rome are his
successors. Both which have been disputed by others. But supposing them
true; yet if by Bishop of Rome, be understood either the monarch of the
Church, or the supreme pastor of it; not Silvester, but Constantine, who
was the first Christian emperor, was that bishop; and as Constantine, so
all other Christian emperors, were of right supreme bishops of the Roman
empire: I say, of the Roman empire, not of all Christendom; for other
Christian sovereigns had the same right in their several territories, as
to an office essentially adherent to their sovereignty. Which shall
serve for answer to his second book.

[Sidenote: The third book.]

In the third book he handleth the question, whether the Pope be
Antichrist? For my part, I see no argument that proves he is so, in that
sense the Scripture useth the name: nor will I take any argument from
the quality of Antichrist, to contradict the authority he exerciseth, or
hath heretofore exercised, in the dominions of any other prince or
state.

It is evident that the prophets of the Old Testament foretold, and the
Jews expected a Messiah, that is, a Christ, that should re-establish
amongst them the kingdom of God, which had been rejected by them in the
time of Samuel, when they required a king after the manner of other
nations. This expectation of theirs made them obnoxious to the imposture
of all such, as had both the ambition to attempt the attaining of the
kingdom, and the art to deceive the people by counterfeit miracles, by
hypocritical life, or by orations and doctrine plausible. Our Saviour
therefore, and his apostles, forewarned men of false prophets and of
false Christs. False Christs are such as pretend to be the _Christ_, but
are not, and are called properly _Antichrists_; in such sense, as when
there happeneth a schism in the Church, by the election of two Popes,
the one calleth the other _Antipapa_, or the false Pope. And therefore
Antichrist in the proper signification hath two essential marks; one,
that he denieth Jesus to be Christ; and another that he professeth
himself to be Christ. The first mark is set down by St. John in his
first Epistle, iv. 3, _Every Spirit that confesseth not that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God; and this is the spirit of
Antichrist_. The other mark is expressed in the words of our Saviour,
(_Matth._ xxiv. 5) _many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ_;
and again, (verse 23) _If any man shall say unto you, lo! here is
Christ, there is Christ, believe it not_. And therefore Antichrist must
be a false Christ; that is, some one of them that shall pretend
themselves to be Christ. And out of these two marks, _to deny Jesus to
be the Christ_, and _to affirm himself to be the Christ_, it followeth,
that he must also be an _adversary of Jesus the true Christ_, which is
another usual signification of the word Antichrist. But of these many
Antichrists, there is one special one, ὁ Αντίχριστος, _the Antichrist_,
or _Antichrist_ definitely, as one certain person; not indefinitely _an
Antichrist_. Now, seeing the Pope of Rome neither pretendeth himself,
nor denieth Jesus to be the Christ, I perceive not how he can be called
Antichrist; by which word is not meant, one that falsely pretendeth to
be _his lieutenant_ or _vicar-general_, but to be _He_. There is also
some mark of the time of this special Antichrist, as (_Matth._ xxiv.
15), when that abominable destroyer, spoken of by Daniel (_Dan._ ix. 27)
shall stand in the Holy place, and such tribulation as was not since the
beginning of the world, nor ever shall be again, insomuch as if it were
to last long, (_Matth._ xxiv. 22) _no flesh could be saved; but for the
elect’s sake those days shall be shortened_, made fewer. But that
tribulation is not yet come; for it is to be followed immediately (verse
29) by a darkening of the sun and moon, a falling of the stars, a
concussion of the heavens, and the glorious coming again of our Saviour
in the clouds. And therefore _the Antichrist_ is not yet come; whereas,
many Popes are both come and gone. It is true, the Pope, in taking upon
him to give laws to all Christian kings and nations, usurpeth a kingdom
in this world, which Christ took not on him: but he doth it not _as
Christ_, but as _for Christ_, wherein there is nothing of _the
Antichrist_.

[Sidenote: Fourth book.]

In the fourth book, to prove the Pope to be the supreme judge in all
questions of faith and manners, _which is as much as to be the absolute
monarch of all Christians in the world_, he bringeth three propositions:
the first, that his judgments are infallible: the second, that he can
make very laws, and punish those that observe them not: the third, that
our Saviour conferred all jurisdiction ecclesiastical on the Pope of
Rome.

[Sidenote: Texts for the infallibility of the Pope’s judgment in points
           of faith.]

For the infallibility of his judgments, he allegeth the Scriptures: and
first, that of Luke, xxii. 31, 32: _Simon, Simon, Satan hath desired
you, that he may sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not; and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren_.
This, according to Bellarmine’s exposition, is, that Christ gave here to
Simon Peter two privileges: one, that neither his faith should fail, nor
the faith of any of his successors: the other, that neither he, nor any
of his successors, should ever define any point concerning faith or
manners erroneously, or contrary to the definition of a former Pope:
which is a strange, and very much strained interpretation. But he that
with attention readeth that chapter, shall find there is no place in the
whole Scripture that maketh more against the Pope’s authority, than this
very place. The Priests and Scribes seeking to kill our Saviour at the
Passover, and Judas possessed with a resolution to betray him, and the
day of killing the Passover being come, our Saviour celebrated the same
with his apostles, which he said, till the kingdom of God was come he
would do no more; and withal told them, that one of them was to betray
him. Hereupon they questioned which of them it should be; and withal,
seeing the next Passover their master would celebrate should be when he
was king, entered into a contention, who should then be the greatest
man. Our Saviour therefore told them, that the kings of the nations had
dominion over their subjects, and are called by a name in Hebrew, that
signifies bountiful; but I cannot be so to you, you must endeavour to
serve one another; I ordain you a kingdom, but it is such as my Father
hath ordained me; a kingdom that I am now to purchase with my blood, and
not to possess till my second coming; then ye shall eat and drink at my
table, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And then
addressing himself to St. Peter, he saith; Simon, Simon, Satan seeks, by
suggesting a present domination, to weaken your faith of the future; but
I have prayed for thee, that thy faith shall not fail; thou therefore
note this, being converted, and understanding my kingdom as of another
world, confirm the same faith in thy brethren. To which St. Peter
answered, as one that no more expected any authority in this world,
_Lord, I am ready to go with thee, not only to prison, but to death_.
Whereby it is manifest, St. Peter had not only no jurisdiction given him
in this world, but a charge to teach all the other apostles, that they
also should have none. And for the infallibility of St. Peter’s sentence
definitive in matter of faith, there is no more to be attributed to it
out of this text, than that Peter should continue in the belief of this
point, namely, that Christ should come again and possess the kingdom at
the day of judgment; which was not given by this text to all his
successors; for we see they claim it in the world that now is.

The second place is that of Matth. xvi. 18, _Thou art Peter, and upon
this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it_. By which, as I have already shown in this chapter,
is proved no more, than that the gates of hell shall not prevail against
the confession of Peter, which gave occasion to that speech; namely
this, that _Jesus is Christ the Son of God_.

The third text is John xxi. 16, 17: _Feed my sheep_; which contains no
more but a commission of teaching. And if we grant the rest of the
apostles to be contained in that name of _sheep_; then it is the supreme
power of teaching: but it was only for the time that there were no
Christian sovereigns already possessed of that supremacy. But I have
already proved, that Christian sovereigns are in their own dominions the
supreme pastors, and instituted thereto, by virtue of their being
baptized, though without other imposition of hands. For such imposition,
being a ceremony of designing the person, is needless, when he is
already designed to the power of teaching what doctrine he will, by his
institution to an absolute power over his subjects. For as I have proved
before, sovereigns are supreme teachers, in general, by their office;
and therefore oblige themselves, by their baptism, to teach the doctrine
of Christ: and when they suffer others to teach their people, they do it
at the peril of their own souls; for it is at the hands of the heads of
families that God will require the account of the instruction of his
children and servants. It is of Abraham himself, not of a hireling, that
God saith (_Gen._ xviii. 19) _I know him that he will command his
children, and his household after him, that they keep the way of the
Lord, and do justice and judgment_.

The fourth place is that of _Exod._ xxviii. 30: _Thou shalt put in the
breast-plate of judgment, the Urim and the Thummim_: which he saith is
interpreted by the Septuagint δήλωσιν κὰι ἀλήθειαν; that is, _evidence_
and _truth_: and thence concludeth, God hath given evidence and truth,
which is almost infallibility, to the high-priest. But be it evidence
and truth itself that was given; or be it but admonition to the priest
to endeavour to inform himself clearly, and give judgment uprightly; yet
in that it was given to the high-priest, it was given to the civil
sovereign; (for such next under God was the high-priest in the
commonwealth of Israel); and is an argument for evidence and truth, that
is, for the ecclesiastical supremacy of civil sovereigns over their own
subjects, against the pretended power of the Pope. These are all the
texts he bringeth for the infallibility of the judgment of the Pope in
point of faith.

[Sidenote: Texts for the same, in point of manners.]

For the infallibility of his judgment concerning manners, he bringeth
one text, which is that of John xvi. 13: _When the Spirit of truth is
come, he will lead you into all truth_: where, saith he, by _all truth_,
is meant, at least _all truth necessary to salvation_. But with this
mitigation, he attributeth no more infallibility to the Pope, than to
any man that professeth Christianity and is not to be damned. For if any
man err in any point, wherein not to err is necessary to salvation, it
is impossible he should be saved; for that only is necessary to
salvation, without which to be saved is impossible. What points these
are, I shall declare out of the Scripture in the chapter following. In
this place I say no more, but that though it were granted, the Pope
could not possibly teach any error at all, yet doth not this entitle him
to any jurisdiction in the dominions of another prince; unless we shall
also say, a man is obliged in conscience to set on work upon all
occasions the best workman, even then also when he hath formerly
promised his work to another.

Besides the text, he argueth from reason, thus. If the Pope could err in
necessaries, then Christ hath not sufficiently provided for the Church’s
salvation; because he hath commanded her to follow the Pope’s
directions. But this reason is invalid, unless he shew when and where
Christ commanded that, or took at all any notice of a Pope. Nay,
granting whatsoever was given to St. Peter, was given to the Pope; yet
seeing there is in the Scripture no command to any man to obey St.
Peter, no man can be just, that obeyeth him, when his commands are
contrary to those of his lawful sovereign.

Lastly, it hath not been declared by the Church, nor by the Pope
himself, that he is the civil sovereign of all the Christians in the
world; and therefore all Christians are not bound to acknowledge his
jurisdiction in point of manners. For the civil sovereignty, and supreme
judicature in controversies of manners, are the same thing: and the
makers of civil laws, are not only declarers, but also makers of the
justice and injustice of actions; there being nothing in men’s manners
that makes them righteous or unrighteous, but their conformity with the
law of the sovereign. And therefore, when the Pope challengeth supremacy
in controversies of manners, he teacheth men to disobey the civil
sovereign; which is an erroneous doctrine, contrary to the many precepts
of our Saviour and his apostles, delivered to us in the Scripture.

To prove the Pope has power to make laws, he allegeth many places; as
first, (_Deut._ xvii. 12), _The man that will do presumptuously, and
will not hearken unto the priest, that standeth to minister there before
the Lord thy God, or unto the judge, even that man shall die; and thou
shalt put away the evil from Israel_. For answer whereunto, we are to
remember that the high-priest, next and immediately under God, was the
civil sovereign; and all judges were to be constituted by him. The words
alleged sound therefore thus: _The man that will presume to disobey the
civil sovereign for the time being, or any of his officers in the
execution of their places, that man shall die, &c._; which is clearly
for the civil sovereignty, against the universal power of the Pope.

Secondly, he allegeth that of Matth. xvi. 19, _Whatsoever ye shall bind,
&c._ and interpreteth it for such _binding_ as is attributed (_Matth._
xxiii. 4) to the Scribes and Pharisees, _They bind heavy burthens, and
grievous to be borne, and lay them on men’s shoulders_; by which is
meant, he says, making of laws; and concludes thence, that the Pope can
make laws. But this also maketh only for the legislative power of civil
sovereigns. For the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses’ chair; but Moses
next under God was sovereign of the people of Israel: and therefore our
Saviour commanded them to do all that they should say, but not all that
they should do: that is, to obey their laws, but not follow their
example.

The third place is John xxi. 16, _Feed my sheep_; which is not a power
to make laws, but a command to teach. Making laws belongs to the lord of
the family; who by his own discretion chooseth his chaplain, as also a
schoolmaster to teach his children.

The fourth place (_John_ xx. 21) is against him. The words are, _As my
father sent me, so send I you_. But our Saviour was sent to redeem by
his death such as should believe, and by his own and his apostles’
preaching to prepare them for their entrance into his kingdom; which he
himself saith, is not of this world, and hath taught us to pray for the
coming of it hereafter, though he refused (_Acts_ i. 6, 7) to tell his
apostles when it should come; and in which, when it comes, the twelve
apostles shall sit on twelve thrones, every one perhaps as high as that
of St. Peter, to judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Seeing then God the
Father sent not our Saviour to make laws in this present world, we may
conclude from the text, that neither did our Saviour send St. Peter to
make laws here, but to persuade men to expect his second coming with a
steadfast faith; and in the mean time, if subjects, to obey their
princes; and if princes, both to believe it themselves, and to do their
best to make their subjects do the same; which is the office of a
bishop. Therefore this place maketh most strongly for the joining of the
ecclesiastical supremacy to the civil sovereignty, contrary to that
which Cardinal Bellarmine allegeth it for.

The fifth place is _Acts_ xv. 28, 29, _It hath seemed good to the Holy
Spirit and to us, to lay upon you no greater burthen, than these
necessary things, that ye abstain from meats offered to idols, and from
blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication_. Here he notes
the word _laying of burthens_ for the legislative power. But who is
there, that reading this text, can say, this style of the apostles may
not as properly be used in giving counsel, as in making laws? The style
of a law is, _we command_: but, _we think good_, is the ordinary style
of them, that but give advice; and they lay a burthen that give advice,
though it be conditional, that is, if they to whom they give it, will
attain their ends: and such is the burthen of abstaining from things
strangled, and from blood; not absolute, but in case they will not err.
I have shown before, (chapter XXV.) that law is distinguished from
counsel in this, that the reason of a law is taken from the design and
benefit of him that prescribeth it; but the reason of a counsel, from
the design and benefit of him to whom the counsel is given. But here,
the apostles aim only at the benefit of the converted Gentiles, namely
their salvation; not at their own benefit; for having done their
endeavour, they shall have their reward, whether they be obeyed or not.
And therefore the acts of this council, were not laws, but counsels.

The sixth place is that of _Rom._ xiii, _Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers, for there is no power but of God_; which is meant, he
saith, not only of secular, but also of ecclesiastical princes. To which
I answer, first, that there are no ecclesiastical princes but those that
are also civil sovereigns; and their principalities exceed not the
compass of their civil sovereignty; without those bounds, though they
may be received for doctors, they cannot be acknowledged for princes.
For if the apostle had meant, we should be subject both to our own
princes, and also to the Pope, he had taught us a doctrine, which Christ
himself hath told us is impossible, namely, _to serve two masters_. And
though the apostle say in another place, (_2 Cor._ xiii. 10) _I write
these things being absent, lest being present I should use sharpness,
according to the power which the Lord hath given me_; it is not, that he
challenged a power either to put to death, imprison, banish, whip, or
fine any of them, which are punishments; but only to excommunicate,
which, without the civil power, is no more but a leaving of their
company, and having no more to do with them than with a heathen man or a
publican; which in many occasions might be a greater pain to the
excommunicant, than to the excommunicate.

The seventh place is _1 Cor._ iv. 21, _Shall I come unto you with a rod,
or in love, and the spirit of lenity?_ But here again, it is not the
power of a magistrate to punish offenders, that is meant by a rod; but
only the power of excommunication, which is not in its own nature a
punishment, but only a denouncing of punishment, that Christ shall
inflict when he shall be in possession of his kingdom, at the day of
judgment. Nor then also shall it be properly a punishment, as upon a
subject that hath broken the law; but a revenge, as upon an enemy or
revolter, that denieth the right of our Saviour to the kingdom. And
therefore this proveth not the legislative power of any bishop, that has
not also the civil power.

The eighth place is _1 Timothy_, iii. 2; _A bishop must be the husband
of but one wife, vigilant, sober, &c._: which he saith was a law. I
thought that none could make a law in the Church, but the monarch of the
Church, St. Peter. But suppose this precept made by the authority of St.
Peter; yet I see no reason why to call it a law, rather than an advice,
seeing Timothy was not a subject, but a disciple of St. Paul; nor the
flock under the charge of Timothy, his subjects in the kingdom, but his
scholars in the school of Christ. If all the precepts he giveth Timothy
be laws, why is not this also a law, (_1 Tim._ v. 23) _Drink no longer
water, but use a little wine for thy health’s sake_. And why are not
also the precepts of good physicians so many laws, but that it is not
the imperative manner of speaking, but an absolute subjection to a
person, that maketh his precepts laws?

In like manner, the ninth place, _1 Tim._ v. 19, _Against an elder
receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses_, is a wise
precept, but not a law.

The tenth place is _Luke_ x. 16, _He that heareth you, heareth me; and
he that despiseth you, despiseth me_. And there is no doubt, but he that
despiseth the counsel of those that are sent by Christ, despiseth the
counsel of Christ himself. But who are those now that are sent by
Christ, but such as are ordained pastors by lawful authority? And who
are lawfully ordained, that are not ordained by the sovereign pastor?
And who is ordained by the sovereign pastor in a Christian commonwealth,
that is not ordained by the authority of the sovereign thereof? Out of
this place therefore it followeth, that he which heareth his sovereign,
being a Christian, heareth Christ; and he that despiseth the doctrine
which his king, being a Christian, authorizeth, despiseth the doctrine
of Christ: which is not that which Bellarmine intendeth here to prove,
but the contrary. But all this is nothing to a law. Nay more, a
Christian king, as a pastor and teacher of his subjects, makes not
thereby his doctrines laws. He cannot oblige men to believe; though as a
civil sovereign he may make laws suitable to his doctrine, which may
oblige men to certain actions, and sometimes to such as they would not
otherwise do, and which he ought not to command; and yet when they are
commanded, they are laws; and the external actions done in obedience to
them, without the inward approbation, are the actions of the sovereign,
and not of the subject, which is in that case but as an instrument,
without any motion of his own at all; because God hath commanded to obey
them.

The eleventh is every place where the apostle for counsel putteth some
word, by which men use to signify command; or calleth the following of
his counsel by the name of obedience. And therefore they are alleged out
of _1 Cor._ xi. 2, _I commend you for keeping my precepts as I delivered
them to you_. The Greek is, _I commend you for keeping those things I
delivered to you, as I delivered them_. Which is far from signifying
that they were laws, or anything else, but good counsel. And that of _1
Thess._ iv. 2, _You know what commandments we gave you_: where the Greek
word is παραγγελίας ἐδώκαμεν, equivalent to παρεδώκαμεν, _what we
delivered to you_, as in the place next before alleged, which does not
prove the traditions of the apostles to be any more than counsels;
though as is said in the 8th verse, _he that despiseth them, despiseth
not man, but God_. For our Saviour himself came not to judge, that is,
to be king in this world; but to sacrifice himself for sinners, and
leave doctors in his Church to lead, not to drive men to Christ, who
never accepteth forced actions, (which is all the law produceth,) but
the inward conversion of the heart; which is not the work of laws, but
of counsel and doctrine.

And that of _2 Thess._ iii. 14, _If any man obey not our word by this
Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed_: where from the word _obey_, he would infer, that this epistle
was a law to the Thessalonians. The epistles of the emperors were indeed
laws. If therefore the epistle of St. Paul were also a law, they were to
obey two masters. But the word _obey_, as it is in the Greek ὑπακούει,
signifieth _hearkening to_ or _putting in practice_, not only that which
is commanded by him that has right to punish, but also that which is
delivered in a way of counsel for our good; and therefore St. Paul does
not bid kill him that disobeys; nor beat, nor imprison, nor amerce him,
which legislators may all do; but avoid his company, that he may be
ashamed: whereby it is evident, it was not the empire of an apostle, but
his reputation amongst the faithful, which the Christians stood in awe
of.

The last place is that of _Heb._ xiii. 17, _Obey your leaders, and
submit yourselves to them; for they watch for your souls, as they that
must give account_: and here also is intended by obedience, a following
of their counsel. For the reason of our obedience is not drawn from the
will and command of our pastors, but from our own benefit, as being the
salvation of our souls they watch for, and not for the exaltation of
their own power and authority. If it were meant here, that all they
teach were laws, then not only the Pope, but every pastor in his parish
should have legislative power. Again, they that are bound to obey their
pastors, have no power to examine their commands. What then shall we say
to St. John, who bids us (_1 Epistle_ iv. 1) _Not to believe every
spirit, but to try the spirits whether they are of God; because many
false prophets are gone out into the world_? It is therefore manifest,
that we may dispute the doctrine of our pastors; but no man can dispute
a law. The commands of civil sovereigns are on all sides granted to be
laws: if any else can make a law besides himself, all commonwealth, and
consequently all peace and justice must cease; which is contrary to all
laws both divine and human. Nothing therefore can be drawn from these,
or any other places of Scripture, to prove the decrees of the Pope,
where he has not also the civil sovereignty, to be laws.

[Sidenote: The question of superiority between the Pope and other
           bishops.]

The last point he would prove, is this, _That our Saviour Christ has
committed ecclesiastical jurisdiction immediately to none but the Pope_.
Wherein he handleth not the question of supremacy between the Pope and
Christian kings, but between the Pope and other bishops. And first, he
says, it is agreed that the jurisdiction of bishops is at least in the
general _de jure divino_, that is, in the right of God; for which he
alleges St. Paul, _Eph._ iv. 11, where he says, that Christ after his
ascension into heaven, _gave gifts to men, some apostles, some prophets,
and some evangelists, and some pastors, and some teachers_; and thence
infers, they have indeed their jurisdiction in God’s right; but will not
grant they have it immediately from God, but derived through the Pope.
But if a man may be said to have his jurisdiction _de jure divino_, and
yet not immediately; what lawful jurisdiction, though but civil, is
there in a Christian commonwealth, that is not also _de juro divino_?
For Christian kings have their civil power from God immediately; and the
magistrates under him exercise their several charges in virtue of his
commission; wherein that which they do, is no less _de jure divino
mediato_, than that which the bishops do in virtue of the Pope’s
ordination. All lawful power is of God, immediately in the Supreme
Governor, and mediately in those that have authority under him: so that
either he must grant every constable in the state, to hold his office in
the right of God; or he must not hold that any bishop holds his so,
besides the Pope himself.

But this whole dispute, whether Christ left the jurisdiction to the Pope
only, or to other bishops also, if considered out of those places where
the Pope has the civil sovereignty, is a contention _de lana caprina_:
for none of them, where they are not sovereigns, has any jurisdiction at
all. For jurisdiction is the power of hearing and determining causes
between man and man; and can belong to none but him that hath the power
to prescribe the rules of right and wrong; that is, to make laws; and
with the sword of justice to compel men to obey his decisions,
pronounced either by himself, or by the judges he ordaineth thereunto;
which none can lawfully do but the civil sovereign.

Therefore when he allegeth out of chapter vi. of _Luke_, that our
Saviour called his disciples together, and chose twelve of them, which
he named apostles, he proveth that he elected them (all, except
Matthias, Paul and Barnabas,) and gave them power and command to preach,
but not to judge of causes between man and man: for that is a power
which he refused to take upon himself, saying, _Who made me a judge, or
a divider, amongst you?_ and in another place, _My kingdom is not of
this world_. But he that hath not the power to hear and determine causes
between man and man, cannot be said to have any jurisdiction at all. And
yet this hinders not, but that our Saviour gave them power to preach and
baptize in all parts of the world, supposing they were not by their own
lawful sovereign forbidden: for to our own sovereigns Christ himself,
and his apostles, have in sundry places expressly commanded us in all
things to be obedient.

The arguments by which he would prove, that bishops receive their
jurisdiction from the Pope (seeing the Pope in the dominions of other
princes hath no jurisdiction himself,) are all in vain. Yet because they
prove, on the contrary, that all bishops receive jurisdiction, when they
have it, from their civil sovereigns, I will not omit the recital of
them.

The first is from chapter xi. of _Numbers_, where Moses not being able
alone to undergo the whole burthen of administering the affairs of the
people of Israel, God commanded him to choose seventy elders, and took
part of the spirit of Moses, to put it upon those seventy elders: by
which is understood, not that God weakened the spirit of Moses; for that
had not eased him at all; but that they had all of them their authority
from him; wherein he doth truly and ingenuously interpret that place.
But seeing Moses had the entire sovereignty in the commonwealth of the
Jews, it is manifest, that it is thereby signified, that they had their
authority from the civil sovereign: and therefore that place proveth
that bishops in every Christian commonwealth have their authority from
the civil sovereign; and from the Pope in his own territories only, and
not in the territories of any other state.

The second argument, is from the nature of monarchy; wherein all
authority is in one man, and in others by derivation from him. But the
government of the Church, he says, is monarchical. This also makes for
Christian monarchs. For they are really monarchs of their own people;
that is, of their own Church; for the Church is the same thing with a
Christian people; whereas the power of the Pope, though he were St.
Peter, is neither monarchy, nor hath anything of _archical_, nor
_cratical_, but only of _didactical_; for God accepteth not a forced,
but a willing obedience.

The third, is from that the _see_ of St. Peter is called by St. Cyprian,
the _head_, the _source_, the _root_, the _sun_, from whence the
authority of bishops is derived. But by the law of nature, which is a
better principle of right and wrong than the word of any doctor that is
but a man, the civil sovereign in every commonwealth, is the _head_, the
_source_, the _root_, and the _sun_, from which all jurisdiction is
derived. And therefore the jurisdiction of bishops, is derived from the
civil sovereign.

The fourth, is taken from the inequality of their jurisdictions. For if
God, saith he, had given it them immediately, he had given as well
equality of jurisdiction, as of order: but we see, some are bishops but
of one town, some of a hundred towns, and some of many whole provinces;
which differences were not determined by the command of God; their
jurisdiction therefore is not of God, but of man; and one has a greater,
another a less, as it pleaseth the Prince of the Church. Which argument,
if he had proved before, that the Pope had an universal jurisdiction
over all Christians, had been for his purpose. But seeing that hath not
been proved, and that it is notoriously known, the large jurisdiction of
the Pope was given him by those that had it, that is, by the emperors of
Rome, (for the patriarch of Constantinople, upon the same title, namely
of being bishop of the capital city of the empire, and seat of the
emperor, claimed to be equal to him), it followeth, that all other
bishops have their jurisdiction from the sovereigns of the place wherein
they exercise the same. And as for that cause they have not their
authority _de jure divino_; so neither hath the Pope his _de jure
divino_, except only where he is also the civil sovereign.

His fifth argument is this: _if bishops have their jurisdiction
immediately from God, the Pope could not take it from them, for he can
do nothing contrary to God’s ordination_; and this consequence is good,
and well proved. _But_, saith he, _the Pope can do this, and has done
it_. This also is granted, so he do it in his own dominions, or in the
dominions of any other prince that hath given him that power; but not
universally, in right of the popedom: for that power belongeth to every
Christian sovereign, within the bounds of his own empire, and is
inseparable from the sovereignty. Before the people of Israel had, by
the commandment of God to Samuel, set over themselves a king, after the
manner of other nations, the high-priest had the civil government; and
none but he could make or depose an inferior priest. But that power was
afterwards in the king, as may be proved by this same argument of
Bellarmine; for if the priest, be he the high-priest or any other, had
his jurisdiction immediately from God, then the king could not take it
from him; _for he could do nothing contrary to God’s ordinance_. But it
is certain that king Solomon (_1 Kings_ ii. 26, 27) deprived Abiathar
the high-priest of his office, and placed Zadok (verse 35) in his room.
Kings therefore may in like manner ordain and deprive bishops, as they
shall think fit for the well-governing of their subjects.

His sixth argument is this, if bishops have their jurisdiction _de jure
divino_, that is, _immediately from God_, they that maintain it, should
bring some word of God to prove it: but they can bring none. The
argument is good; I have therefore nothing to say against it. But it is
an argument no less good, to prove the Pope himself to have no
jurisdiction in the dominion of any other prince.

Lastly, he bringeth for argument the testimony of two popes, Innocent
and Leo; and I doubt not he might have alleged, with as good reason, the
testimonies of all the popes almost since St. Peter. For considering the
love of power naturally implanted in mankind, whosoever were made Pope,
he would be tempted to uphold the same opinion. Nevertheless, they
should therein but do, as Innocent and Leo did, bear witness of
themselves, and therefore their witness should not be good.

[Sidenote: Of the Pope’s temporal power.]

In the fifth book he hath four conclusions. The first is, _that the Pope
is not lord of all the world_: the second, _that the Pope is not the
lord of all the Christian world_: the third, _that the Pope, without his
own territory, has not any temporal jurisdiction_ DIRECTLY. These three
conclusions are easily granted. The fourth is, _that the Pope has, in
the dominions of other princes, the supreme temporal power_ INDIRECTLY:
which is denied; unless he mean by _indirectly_, that he has gotten it
by indirect means, then is that also granted. But I understand, that
when he saith he hath it _indirectly_, he means, that such temporal
jurisdiction belongeth to him of right, but that this right is but a
consequence of his pastoral authority, the which he could not exercise
unless he have the other with it: and therefore to the pastoral power,
which he calls spiritual, the supreme power civil is necessarily
annexed; and that thereby he hath a right to change kingdoms, giving
them to one and taking them from another, when he shall think it
conduces to the salvation of souls.

Before I come to consider the arguments by which he would prove this
doctrine, it will not be amiss to lay open the consequences of it; that
princes and states, that have the civil sovereignty in their several
commonwealths, may bethink themselves, whether it be convenient for
them, and conducing to the good of their subjects, of whom they are to
give an account at the day of judgment, to admit the same.

When it is said, the Pope hath not, in the territories of other states,
the supreme civil power _directly_; we are to understand, he doth not
challenge it, as other civil sovereigns do, from the original submission
thereto of those that are to be governed. For it is evident, and has
already been sufficiently in this treatise demonstrated, that the right
of all sovereigns is derived originally from the consent of every one of
those that are to be governed; whether they that choose him, do it for
their common defence against an enemy, as when they agree amongst
themselves to appoint a man or an assembly of men to protect them; or
whether they do it, to save their lives, by submission to a conquering
enemy. The Pope therefore, when he disclaimeth the supreme civil power
over other states _directly_, denieth no more, but that his right cometh
to him by that way; he ceaseth not for all that, to claim it another
way; and that is, without the consent of them that are to be governed,
by a right given him by God, which he calleth _indirectly_, in his
assumption to the papacy. But by what way soever he pretend, the power
is the same; and he may, if it be granted to be his right, depose
princes and states, as often as it is for the salvation of souls, that
is, as often as he will; for he claimeth also the sole power to judge
whether it be to the salvation of men’s souls or not. And this is the
doctrine, not only that Bellarmine here, and many other doctors, teach
in their sermons and books, but also that some councils have decreed,
and the Popes have accordingly, when the occasion hath served them, put
in practice. For the fourth council of Lateran, held under Pope Innocent
the Third, in the third chapter _De Hæreticis_, hath this canon: _If a
king, at the Pope’s admonition, do not purge his kingdom of heretics,
and being excommunicate for the same, make not satisfaction within a
year, his subjects are absolved of their obedience_. And the practice
hereof hath been seen on divers occasions; as in the deposing of
Chilperic, king of France; in the translation of the Roman empire to
Charlemagne; in the oppression of John, king of England; in transferring
the kingdom of Navarre; and of late years, in the league against Henry
the Third of France, and in many more occurrences. I think there be few
princes that consider not this as unjust, and inconvenient; but I wish
they would all resolve to be kings or subjects. Men cannot serve two
masters. They ought therefore to ease them, either by holding the reins
of government wholly in their own hands; or by wholly delivering them
into the hands of the Pope; that such men as are willing to be obedient,
may be protected in their obedience. For this distinction of temporal
and spiritual power is but words. Power is as really divided, and as
dangerously to all purposes, by sharing with another _indirect_ power,
as with a _direct_ one. But to come now to his arguments.

The first is this, _The civil power is subject to the spiritual:
therefore he that hath the supreme power spiritual, hath right to
command temporal princes, and dispose of their temporals in order to the
spiritual_. As for the distinction of temporal and spiritual, let us
consider in what sense it may be said intelligibly, that the temporal or
civil power is subject to the spiritual. There be but two ways that
those words can be made sense. For when we say, one power is subject to
another power, the meaning either is, that he which hath the one, is
subject to him that hath the other; or that the one power is to the
other, as the means to the end. For we cannot understand, that one power
hath power over another power; or that one power can have right or
command over another. For subjection, command, right, and power, are
accidents, not of powers, but of persons. One power may be subordinate
to another, as the art of a saddler to the art of a rider. If then it be
granted, that the civil government be ordained as a means to bring us to
a spiritual felicity; yet it does not follow, that if a king have the
civil power, and the Pope the spiritual, that therefore the king is
bound to obey the Pope, more than every saddler is bound to obey every
rider. Therefore as from subordination of an art, cannot be inferred the
subjection of the professor; so from the subordination of a government,
cannot be inferred the subjection of the governor. When therefore he
saith, the civil power is subject to the spiritual, his meaning is, that
the civil sovereign is subject to the spiritual sovereign. And the
argument stands thus, _The civil sovereign is subject to the spiritual;
therefore the spiritual prince may command temporal princes_. Where the
conclusion is the same with the antecedent he should have proved. But to
prove it, he allegeth first, this reason: _Kings and popes, clergy and
laity, make but one commonwealth; that is to say, but one Church: and in
all bodies the members depend one upon another: but things spiritual
depend not of things temporal: therefore temporal depend on spiritual,
and therefore are subject to them_. In which argumentation there be two
gross errors: one is, that all Christian kings, popes, clergy, and all
other Christian men, make but one commonwealth. For it is evident that
France is one commonwealth, Spain another, and Venice a third, &c. And
these consist of Christians; and therefore also are several bodies of
Christians; that is to say, several Churches: and their several
sovereigns represent them, whereby they are capable of commanding and
obeying, of doing and suffering, as a natural man; which no general or
universal Church is, till it have a representant; which it hath not on
earth: for if it had, there is no doubt but that all Christendom were
one commonwealth, whose sovereign were that representant, both in things
spiritual and temporal. And the Pope, to make himself this representant,
wanteth three things that our Saviour hath not given him, to _command_,
and to _judge_, and to _punish_, otherwise than, by excommunication, to
run from those that will not learn of him. For though the Pope were
Christ’s only vicar, yet he cannot exercise his government, till our
Saviour’s second coming: and then also it is not the Pope, but St. Peter
himself with the other apostles, that are to be judges of the world.

The other error in this his first argument is, that he says, the members
of every commonwealth, as of a natural body, depend one of another. It
is true, they cohere together; but they depend only on the sovereign,
which is the soul of the commonwealth; which failing, the commonwealth
is dissolved into a civil war, no one man so much as cohering to
another, for want of a common dependance on a known sovereign; just as
the members of the natural body dissolve into earth, for want of a soul
to hold them together. Therefore there is nothing in this similitude,
from whence to infer a dependance of the laity on the clergy, or of the
temporal officers on the spiritual; but of both on the civil sovereign;
which ought indeed to direct his civil commands to the salvation of
souls; but is not therefore subject to any but God himself. And thus you
see the laboured fallacy of the first argument, to deceive such men as
distinguish not between the subordination of actions in the way to the
end; and the subjection of persons one to another in the administration
of the means. For to every end, the means are determined by nature, or
by God himself supernaturally: but the power to make men use the means,
is in every nation resigned, by the law of nature, which forbiddeth men
to violate their faith given, to the civil sovereign.

His second argument is this; _Every commonwealth, because it is supposed
to be perfect and sufficient in itself, may command any other
commonwealth not subject to it, and force it to change the
administration of the government; nay, depose the prince, and set
another in his room, if it cannot otherwise defend itself against the
injuries he goes about to do them: much more may a spiritual
commonwealth command a temporal one to change the administration of
their government, and may depose princes, and institute others, when
they cannot otherwise defend the spiritual good_.

That a commonwealth, to defend itself against injuries, may lawfully do
all that he hath here said, is very true; and hath already in that which
hath gone before been sufficiently demonstrated. And if it were also
true, that there is now in this world a spiritual commonwealth, distinct
from a civil commonwealth, then might the prince thereof, upon injury
done him, or upon want of caution that injury be not done him in time to
come, repair and secure himself by war; which is, in sum, deposing,
killing, or subduing, or doing any act of hostility. But by the same
reason, it would be no less lawful for a civil sovereign, upon the like
injuries done, or feared, to make war upon the spiritual sovereign;
which I believe is more than Cardinal Bellarmine would have inferred
from his own proposition.

But spiritual commonwealth there is none in this world: for it is the
same thing with the kingdom of Christ, which he himself saith, is not of
this world; but shall be in the next world at the resurrection, when
they that have lived justly, and believed that he was the Christ, shall,
though they died _natural_ bodies, rise _spiritual_ bodies; and then it
is, that our Saviour shall judge the world, and conquer his adversaries,
and make a spiritual commonwealth. In the meantime, seeing there are no
men on earth whose bodies are spiritual, there can be no spiritual
commonwealth amongst men that are yet in the flesh; unless we call
preachers, that have commission to teach, and prepare men for their
reception into the kingdom of Christ at the resurrection, a
commonwealth; which I have proved already to be none.

The third argument is this; _It is not lawful for Christians to tolerate
an infidel, or heretical king, in case he endeavour to draw them to his
heresy or infidelity. But to judge whether a king draw his subjects to
heresy or not, belongeth to the Pope. Therefore hath the Pope right to
determine whether the prince be to be deposed, or not deposed._

To this I answer, that both these assertions are false. For Christians,
or men of what religion soever, if they tolerate not their king,
whatsoever law he maketh, though it be concerning religion, do violate
their faith, contrary to the divine law, both _natural_ and _positive_:
nor is there any judge of heresy amongst subjects, but their own civil
sovereign. For _heresy is nothing else but a private opinion obstinately
maintained, contrary to the opinion which the public person, that is to
say, the representant of the commonwealth, hath commanded to be taught_.
By which it is manifest, that an opinion publicly appointed to be
taught, cannot be heresy; nor the sovereign princes that authorize them,
heretics. For heretics are none but private men, that stubbornly defend
some doctrine, prohibited by their lawful sovereigns.

But to prove that Christians are not to tolerate infidel or heretical
kings, he allegeth a place in _Deut._ xvii. 15, where God forbiddeth the
Jews, when they shall set a king over themselves, to choose a stranger:
and from thence inferreth, that it is unlawful for a Christian to choose
a king that is not a Christian. And it is true, that he that is a
Christian, that is, he that hath already obliged himself to receive our
Saviour, when he shall come, for his king, shall tempt God too much in
choosing for king in this world, one that he knoweth will endeavour,
both by terror and persuasion, to make him violate his faith. But it is,
saith he, the same danger, to choose one that is not a Christian, for
king, and not to depose him when he is chosen. To this I say, the
question is not of the danger of not deposing; but of the justice of
deposing him. To choose him, may in some cases be unjust; but to depose
him when he is chosen, is in no case just. For it is always violation of
faith, and consequently against the law of nature, which is the eternal
law of God. Nor do we read that any such doctrine was accounted
Christian in the time of the apostles; nor in the time of the Roman
emperors, till the Popes had the civil sovereignty of Rome. But to this
he hath replied, that the Christians of old deposed not Nero, nor
Dioclesian, nor Julian, nor Valens an Arian, for this cause only, that
they wanted temporal forces. Perhaps so. But did our Saviour, who for
calling for, might have had twelve legions of immortal, invulnerable
angels to assist him, want forces to depose Cæsar, or at least Pilate,
that unjustly, without finding fault in him, delivered him to the Jews
to be crucified? Or if the apostles wanted temporal forces to depose
Nero, was it therefore necessary for them, in their epistles to the new
made Christians, to teach them, as they did, to obey the powers
constituted over them, whereof Nero in that time was one, and that they
ought to obey them, not for fear of their wrath, but for conscience
sake? Shall we say they did not only obey, but also teach what they
meant not, for want of strength? It is not therefore for want of
strength, but for conscience sake, that Christians are to tolerate their
heathen princes, or princes (for I cannot call any one whose doctrine is
the public doctrine, an heretic) that authorize the teaching of an
error. And whereas for the temporal power of the Pope, he allegeth
further, that St. Paul (_1 Cor._ vi.) appointed judges under the heathen
princes of those times, such as were not ordained by those princes; it
is not true. For St. Paul does but advise them, to take some of their
brethren to compound their differences as arbitrators, rather than to go
to law one with another before the heathen judges; which is a wholesome
precept, and full of charity, fit to be practised also in the best
Christian commonwealths. And for the danger that may arise to religion,
by the subjects tolerating of a heathen, or an erring prince, it is a
point of which a subject is no competent judge; or if he be, the Pope’s
temporal subjects may judge also of the Pope’s doctrine. For every
Christian prince, as I have formerly proved, is no less supreme pastor
of his own subjects, than the Pope of his.

The fourth argument, is taken from the baptism of kings; wherein, that
they may be made Christians, they submit their sceptres to Christ; and
promise to keep and defend the Christian faith. This is true; for
Christian kings are no more but Christ’s subjects: but they may, for all
that, be the Pope’s fellows; for they are supreme pastors of their own
subjects; and the Pope is no more but king and pastor, even in Rome
itself.

The fifth argument, is drawn from the words spoken by our Saviour, _Feed
my sheep_; by which was given all power necessary for a pastor; as the
power to chase away wolves, such as are heretics; the power to shut up
rams, if they be mad, or push at the other sheep with their horns, such
as are evil, though Christian, kings; and power to give the flock
convenient food. From whence he inferreth, that St. Peter had these
three powers given him by Christ. To which I answer, that the last of
these powers is no more than the power, or rather command, to teach. For
the first, which is to chase away wolves, that is, heretics, the place
he quoteth is (_Matth._ vii. 15) _Beware of false prophets, which come
to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves_. But
neither are heretics false prophets, or at all prophets: nor, admitting
heretics for the wolves there meant, were the apostles commanded to kill
them, or if they were kings, to depose them; but to beware of, fly, and
avoid them: nor was it to St. Peter, nor to any of the apostles, but to
the multitude of the Jews that followed him into the mountain, men for
the most part not yet converted, that he gave this counsel, to beware of
false prophets: which therefore, if it confer a power of chasing away
kings, was given, not only to private men, but to men that were not at
all Christians. And as to the power of separating, and shutting up of
furious rams, by which he meaneth Christian kings that refuse to submit
themselves to the Roman pastor, our Saviour refused to take upon him
that power in this world himself, but advised to let the corn and tares
grow up together till the day of judgment: much less did he give it to
St. Peter, or can St. Peter give it to the Popes. St. Peter, and all
other pastors, are bidden to esteem those Christians that disobey the
Church, that is, that disobey the Christian sovereign, as heathen men,
and as publicans. Seeing then, men challenge to the Pope no authority
over heathen princes, they ought to challenge none over those that are
to be esteemed as heathen.

But from the power to teach only, he inferreth also a coercive power in
the Pope over kings. The pastor, saith he, must give his flock
convenient food: therefore the Pope may, and ought to compel kings to do
their duty. Out of which it followeth, that the Pope, as pastor of
Christian men, is king of kings: which all Christian kings ought indeed
either to confess, or else they ought to take upon themselves the
supreme pastoral charge, every one in his own dominion.

His sixth and last argument, is from examples. To which I answer, first,
that examples prove nothing: secondly, that the examples he allegeth
make not so much as a probability of right. The fact of Jehoiada, in
killing Athaliah, (_2 Kings_ xi.) was either by the authority of king
Joash, or it was a horrible crime in the high-priest, which ever after
the election of king Saul was a mere subject. The fact of St. Ambrose,
in excommunicating Theodosius the emperor, if it were true he did so,
was a capital crime. And for the Popes, Gregory I, Gregory II, Zachary,
and Leo III, their judgments are void, as given in their own cause; and
the acts done by them conformably to this doctrine, are the greatest
crimes, especially that of Zachary, that are incident to human nature.
And thus much of Power Ecclesiastical; wherein I had been more brief,
forbearing to examine these arguments of Bellarmine, if they had been
his as a private man, and not as the champion of the Papacy against all
other Christian Princes and States.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XLIII.

               OF WHAT IS NECESSARY FOR A MAN’S RECEPTION
                      INTO THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN.


[Sidenote: The difficulty of obeying God and man both at once;]

The most frequent pretext of sedition, and civil war, in Christian
commonwealths, hath a long time proceeded from a difficulty, not yet
sufficiently resolved, of obeying at once both God and man, then when
their commandments are one contrary to the other. It is manifest enough,
that when a man receiveth two contrary commands, and knows that one of
them is God’s, he ought to obey that, and not the other, though it be
the command even of his lawful sovereign (whether a monarch, or a
sovereign assembly), or the command of his father. The difficulty
therefore consisteth in this, that men, when they are commanded in the
name of God, know not in divers cases, whether the command be from God,
or whether he that commandeth do but abuse God’s name for some private
ends of his own. For as there were in the Church of the Jews, many false
prophets, that sought reputation with the people, by feigned dreams and
visions; so there have been in all times in the Church of Christ, false
teachers, that seek reputation with the people, by fantastical and false
doctrines; and by such reputation, (as is the nature of ambition), to
govern them for their private benefit.

[Sidenote: Is none to them that distinguish between what is, and what is
           not necessary to salvation.]

But this difficulty of obeying both God and the civil sovereign on
earth, to those that can distinguish between what is _necessary_, and
what is not _necessary for their reception into the kingdom of God_, is
of no moment. For if the command of the civil sovereign be such, as that
it may be obeyed without the forfeiture of life eternal; not to obey it
is unjust; and the precept of the apostle takes place: _Servants obey
your masters in all things_; and _Children obey your parents in all
things_; and the precept of our Saviour, _The Scribes and Pharisees sit
in Moses’ chair; all therefore they shall say, that observe and do_. But
if the command be such as cannot be obeyed, without being damned to
eternal death; then it were madness to obey it, and the council of our
Saviour takes place, (_Matth._ x. 28), _Fear not those that kill the
body, but cannot kill the soul_. All men therefore that would avoid,
both the punishments that are to be in this world inflicted, for
disobedience to their earthly sovereign, and those that shall be
inflicted in the world to come, for disobedience to God, have need be
taught to distinguish well between what is, and what is not necessary to
eternal salvation.

[Sidenote: All that is necessary to salvation is contained in faith and
           obedience.]

All that is NECESSARY _to salvation_, is contained in two virtues,
_faith in Christ_, and _obedience to laws_. The latter of these, if it
were perfect, were enough to us. But because we are all guilty of
disobedience to God’s law, not only originally in Adam, but also
actually by our own transgressions, there is required at our hands now,
not only _obedience_ for the rest of our time, but also a _remission of
sins_ for the time past; which remission is the reward of our faith in
Christ. That nothing else is necessarily required to salvation, is
manifest from this, that the kingdom of heaven is shut to none but to
sinners; that is to say, to the disobedient, or transgressors of the
law; nor to them, in case they repent, and believe all the articles of
Christian faith necessary to salvation.

[Sidenote: What obedience is necessary;]

The obedience required at our hands by God, that accepteth in all our
actions the will for the deed, is a serious endeavour to obey him; and
is called also by all such names as signify that endeavour. And
therefore obedience is sometimes called by the names of _charity_ and
_love_, because they imply a will to obey; and our Saviour himself
maketh our love to God, and to one another, a fulfilling of the whole
law: and sometimes by the name of _righteousness_; for righteousness is
but the will to give to every one his own; that is to say, the will to
obey the laws: and sometimes by the name of _repentance_; because to
repent, implieth a turning away from sin, which is the same with the
return of the will to obedience. Whosoever therefore unfeignedly
desireth to fulfil the commandments of God, or repenteth him truly of
his transgressions, or that loveth God with all his heart, and his
neighbour as himself, hath all the obedience necessary to his reception
into the kingdom of God. For if God should require perfect innocence,
there could no flesh be saved.

[Sidenote: And to what laws.]

But what commandments are those that God hath given us? Are all those
laws which were given to the Jews by the hand of Moses, the commandments
of God? If they be, why are not Christians taught to obey them? If they
be not, what others are so, besides the law of nature? For our Saviour
Christ hath not given us new laws, but counsel to observe those we are
subject to; that is to say, the laws of nature, and the laws of our
several sovereigns: nor did he make any new law to the Jews in his
sermon on the Mount, but only expounded the law of Moses, to which they
were subject before. The laws of God therefore are none but the laws of
nature, whereof the principal is, that we should not violate our faith,
that is, a commandment to obey our civil sovereigns, which we
constituted over us by mutual pact one with another. And this law of
God, that commandeth obedience to the law civil, commandeth by
consequence obedience to all the precepts of the Bible; which, as I have
proved in the precedent chapter, is there only law, where the civil
sovereign hath made it so; and in other places, but counsel; which a man
at his own peril may without injustice refuse to obey.

[Sidenote: In the faith of a Christian, who is the person believed.]

Knowing now what is the obedience necessary to salvation, and to whom it
is due; we are to consider next concerning faith, whom, and why we
believe; and what are the articles, or points necessary to be believed
by them that shall be saved. And first, for the person whom we believe,
because it is impossible to believe any person, before we know what he
saith, it is necessary he be one that we have heard speak. The person,
therefore, whom Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and the prophets,
believed, was God himself, that spake unto them supernaturally: and the
person, whom the apostles and disciples that conversed with Christ
believed, was our Saviour himself. But of them, to whom neither God the
father, nor our Saviour, ever spake, it cannot be said that the person
whom they believed, was God. They believed the apostles, and after them
the pastors and doctors of the Church, that recommended to their faith
the history of the Old and New Testament: so that the faith of
Christians ever since our Saviour’s time, hath had for foundation,
first, the reputation of their pastors, and afterward, the authority of
those that made the Old and New Testament to be received for the rule of
faith; which none could do but Christian sovereigns; who are therefore
the supreme pastors, and the only persons whom Christians now hear speak
from God; except such as God speaketh to in these days supernaturally.
But because there be many false prophets _gone out into the world_,
other men are to examine such spirits, as St. John adviseth us, (1st
Epistle iv. 1) _whether they be of God, or not_. And therefore, seeing
the examination of doctrines belongeth to the supreme pastor, the
person, which all they that have no special revelation are to believe,
is, in every commonwealth, the supreme pastor, that is to say, the civil
sovereign.

[Sidenote: The causes of Christian faith.]

The causes why men believe any Christian doctrine, are various. For
faith is the gift of God; and he worketh it in each several man, by such
ways as it seemeth good unto himself. The most ordinary immediate cause
of our belief, concerning any point of Christian faith, is, that we
believe the Bible to be the word of God. But why we believe the Bible to
be the word of God, is much disputed, as all questions must needs be,
that are not well stated. For they make not the question to be, _why we
believe it_, but, _how we know it_; as if _believing_ and _knowing_ were
all one. And thence while one side ground their knowledge upon the
infallibility of the Church, and the other side, on the testimony of the
private spirit, neither side concludeth what it pretends. For how shall
a man know the infallibility of the Church, but by knowing first the
infallibility of the Scripture? Or how shall a man know his own private
spirit to be other than a belief, grounded upon the authority and
arguments of his teachers, or upon a presumption of his own gifts?
Besides, there is nothing in the Scripture, from which can be inferred
the infallibility of the Church; much less, of any particular Church;
and least of all, the infallibility of any particular man.

[Sidenote: Faith comes by hearing.]

It is manifest therefore, that Christian men do not know, but only
believe the Scripture to be the word of God; and that the means of
making them believe, which God is pleased to afford men ordinarily, is
according to the way of nature, that is to say, from their teachers. It
is the doctrine of St. Paul concerning Christian faith in general
(_Rom._ x. 17), _Faith cometh by hearing_, that is, by hearing our
lawful pastors. He saith also, (verses 14, 15, of the same chapter),
_How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how
shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach, except
they be sent?_ Whereby it is evident, that the ordinary cause of
believing that the Scriptures are the word of God, is the same with the
cause of the believing of all other articles of our faith, namely, the
hearing of those that are by the law allowed and appointed to teach us,
as our parents in their houses, and our pastors in the churches. Which
also is made more manifest by experience. For what other cause can there
be assigned, why in Christian commonwealths all men either believe, or
at least profess the Scripture to be the word of God, and in other
commonwealths scarce any; but that in Christian commonwealths they are
taught it from their infancy; and in other places they are taught
otherwise?

But if teaching be the cause of faith, why do not all believe? It is
certain therefore that faith is the gift of God, and he giveth it to
whom he will. Nevertheless, because to them to whom he giveth it, he
giveth it by the means of teachers, the immediate cause of faith is
hearing. In a school, where many are taught, and some profit, others
profit not, the cause of learning in them that profit, is the master;
yet it cannot be thence inferred, that learning is not the gift of God.
All good things proceed from God; yet cannot all that have them, say
they are inspired; for that implies a gift supernatural, and the
immediate hand of God; which he that pretends to, pretends to be a
prophet, and is subject to the examination of the Church.

But whether men _know_, or _believe_, or _grant_ the Scriptures to be
the word of God; if out of such places of them, as are without
obscurity, I shall show what articles of faith are necessary, and only
necessary for salvation, those men must needs _know_, _believe_, or
_grant_ the same.

[Sidenote: The only necessary article of Christian faith;]

The _unum necessarium_, only article of faith, which the Scripture
maketh simply necessary to salvation, is this, that JESUS IS THE CHRIST.
By the name of _Christ_ is understood the king, which God had before
promised by the prophets of the Old Testament, to send into the world,
to reign (over the Jews, and over such of other nations as should
believe in him), under himself eternally; and to give them that eternal
life, which was lost by the sin of Adam. Which when I have proved out of
Scripture, I will further show when, and in what sense, some other
articles may be also called _necessary_.

[Sidenote: Proved from the scope of the Evangelists:]

For proof that the belief of this article, _Jesus is the Christ_, is all
the faith required to salvation, my first argument shall be from the
scope of the Evangelists; which was by the description of the life of
our Saviour, to establish that one article, _Jesus is the Christ_. The
sum of St. Matthew’s Gospel is this, that Jesus was of the stock of
David, born of a Virgin; which are the marks of the true Christ: that
the Magi came to worship him as King of the Jews: that Herod for the
same cause sought to kill him: that John the Baptist proclaimed him:
that he preached by himself and his apostles that he was that king: that
he taught the law, not as a scribe, but as a man of authority: that he
cured diseases by his word only, and did many other miracles, which were
foretold the Christ should do: that he was saluted king when he entered
into Jerusalem: that he forewarned them to beware of all others that
should pretend to be Christ: that he was taken, accused, and put to
death, for saying he was king: that the cause of his condemnation
written on the cross was, JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS. All
which tend to no other end than this, that men should believe that
_Jesus is the Christ_. Such therefore was the scope of St. Matthew’s
Gospel. But the scope of all the evangelists, as may appear by reading
them, was the same. Therefore the scope of the whole Gospel was the
establishing of that only article. And St. John expressly makes it his
conclusion, (_John_ xx. 31), _These things are written, that you may
know that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God_.

[Sidenote: From the sermons of the apostles:]

My second argument is taken from the subjects of the sermons of the
apostles, both whilst our Saviour lived on earth, and after his
ascension. The apostles, in our Saviour’s time, were sent, (_Luke_ ix.
2) _to preach the kingdom of God_. For neither there, nor, _Matth._ x.
7, giveth he any commission to them other than this, _As ye go, preach,
saying, the kingdom of heaven is at hand_; that is, that Jesus is the
_Messiah_, the _Christ_, the _King_ which was to come. That their
preaching also after his ascension was the same, is manifest out of
_Acts_ xvii. 6, 7, _They drew_, saith St. Luke, _Jason and certain
brethren unto the rulers of the city, crying, these that have turned the
world upside down are come hither also, whom Jason hath received: and
these all do contrary to the decrees of Cæsar, saying, that there is
another king, one Jesus_. And out of the 2nd and 3rd verses of the same
chapter, where it is said, that St. Paul, _as his manner was, went in
unto them; and three sabbath days reasoned with them out of the
Scriptures; opening and alleging, that Christ must needs have suffered,
and risen again from the dead, and that this Jesus, whom he preached, is
Christ_.

[Sidenote: From the easiness of the doctrine:]

The third argument is from those places of Scripture, by which all the
faith required to salvation is declared to be easy. For if an inward
assent of the mind to all the doctrines concerning Christian faith now
taught, whereof the greatest part are disputed, were necessary to
salvation, there would be nothing in the world so hard as to be a
Christian. The thief upon the cross, though repenting, could not have
been saved for saying, _Lord remember me when thou comest into thy
kingdom_; by which he testified no belief of any other article, but
this, that _Jesus was the king_. Nor could it be said (as it is,
_Matth._ xi. 30), that _Christ’s yoke is easy, and his burthen light_:
nor that _little children believe in him_, as it is _Matth._ xviii. 6.
Nor could St. Paul have said, (_1 Cor._ i. 21), _It pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe_. Nor could St. Paul
himself have been saved, much less have been so great a doctor of the
Church so suddenly, that never perhaps thought of transubstantiation nor
purgatory, nor many other articles now obtruded.

[Sidenote: From formal and clear texts.]

The fourth argument is taken from places express, and such as receive no
controversy of interpretation; as first, _John_ v. 39; _Search the
Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life; and they are they
that testify of me_. Our Saviour here speaketh of the Scriptures only of
the Old Testament; for the Jews at that time could not search the
Scriptures of the New Testament, which were not written. But the Old
Testament hath nothing of Christ, but the marks by which men might know
him when he came; as that he should descend from David; be born at
Bethlehem, and of a Virgin; do great miracles, and the like. Therefore
to believe that this Jesus was He, was sufficient to eternal life: but
more than sufficient is not necessary; and consequently no other article
is required. Again, (_John_ xi. 26) _Whosoever liveth and believeth in
me, shall not die eternally_. Therefore to believe in Christ, is faith
sufficient to eternal life; and consequently no more faith than that is
necessary. But to believe in Jesus, and to believe that Jesus is the
Christ, is all one, as appeareth in the verses immediately following.
For when our Saviour (verse 26) had said to Martha, _Believest thou
this?_ she answereth (verse 27), _Yea, Lord, I believe that thou art the
Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world_. Therefore
this article alone is faith sufficient to life eternal; and more than
sufficient is not necessary. Thirdly, _John_ xx. 31: _These things are
written that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
and that believing ye might have life through his name_. There, to
believe that _Jesus is the Christ_, is faith sufficient to the obtaining
of life; and therefore no other article is necessary. Fourthly, _1 John_
iv. 2: _Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is of God_. And _1 John_ v. 1: _Whosoever believeth that Jesus is
the Christ, is born of God_. And verse 5, _Who is he that overcometh the
world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?_ Fifthly,
_Acts_ viii. 36, 37: _See_, saith the Eunuch, _here is water, what doth
hinder me to be baptized? And Philip said, if thou believest with all
thy heart, thou mayst. And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God._ Therefore this article believed, _Jesus is
the Christ_, is sufficient to baptism, that is to say, to our reception
into the kingdom of God, and by consequence, only necessary. And
generally in all places where our Saviour saith to any man, _Thy faith
hath saved thee_, the cause he saith it, is some confession, which
directly, or by consequence, implieth a belief, that _Jesus is the
Christ_.

[Sidenote: From that it is the foundation of all other articles.]

The last argument is from the places, where this article is made the
foundation of faith: for he that holdeth the foundation, shall be saved.
Which places are first, _Matth._ xxiv. 23, 24: _If any man shall say
unto you, Lo here is Christ, or there, believe it not; for there shall
arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and
wonders, &c._ Here we see this article, _Jesus is the Christ_, must be
held, though he that shall teach the contrary should do great miracles.
The second place is, _Gal._ i. 8: _Though we, or an angel from heaven,
preach any other gospel unto you, than that we have preached unto you,
let him be accursed_. But the gospel which Paul, and the other apostles,
preached, was only this article, that _Jesus is the Christ_: therefore
for the belief of this article, we are to reject the authority of an
angel from heaven; much more of any mortal man, if he teach the
contrary. This is therefore the fundamental article of Christian faith.
A third place is, _1 John_, iv. 1, 2: _Beloved, believe not every
spirit: hereby ye shall know the Spirit of God; every spirit that
confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God_. By which
it is evident, that this article, is the measure and rule, by which to
estimate and examine all other articles; and is therefore only
fundamental. A fourth is _Matth._ xvi. 16, 18, where after St. Peter had
professed this article, saying to our Saviour, _Thou art Christ the Son
of the living God_, our Saviour answered, _Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock I will build my Church_; from whence I infer, that this article is
that, on which all other doctrines of the Church are built, as on their
foundation. A fifth is _1 Cor._ iii. 11, 12, &c. _Other foundation can
no man lay, than that which is laid, Jesus is the Christ. Now if any man
build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay,
stubble; every man’s work shall be made manifest; for the day shall
declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try
every man’s work of what sort it is. If any man’s work abide, which he
hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward. If any man’s work shall
be burnt, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved, yet so as
by fire._ Which words, being partly plain and easy to understand, and
partly allegorical and difficult; out of that which is plain, maybe
inferred, that pastors that teach this foundation, that _Jesus is the
Christ_, though they draw from it false consequences, which all men are
sometimes subject to, they may nevertheless be saved; much more that
they may be saved, who being no pastors, but hearers, believe that which
is by their lawful pastors taught them. Therefore the belief of this
article is sufficient; and by consequence, there is no other article of
faith necessarily required to salvation.

Now for the part which is allegorical, as _that the fire shall try every
man’s work_, and that _they shall be saved, but so as by fire_, or
_through fire_, (for the original is διὰ πυρὸς,) it maketh nothing
against this conclusion which I have drawn from the other words, that
are plain. Nevertheless, because upon this place there hath been an
argument taken, to prove the fire of purgatory, I will also here offer
you my conjecture concerning the meaning of this trial of doctrines, and
saving of men as by fire. The apostle here seemeth to allude to the
words of the prophet _Zechariah_, (xiii. 8, 9), who speaking of the
restoration of the kingdom of God, saith thus; _Two parts therein shall
be cut off, and die, but the third shall be left therein; and I will
bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is
refined, and will try them as gold is tried; they shall call on the name
of the Lord, and I will hear them_. The day of judgment is the day of
the restoration of the kingdom of God; and at that day it is, that St.
Peter tells us (_2 Pet._ iii. 7, 10, 12) shall be the conflagration of
the world, wherein the wicked shall perish; but the remnant which God
will save, shall pass through that fire unhurt, and be therein, (as
silver and gold are refined by the fire from their dross,) tried, and
refined from their idolatry, and be made to call upon the name of the
true God. Alluding whereto, St. Paul here saith, that _the day_, that
is, the day of judgment, the great day of our Saviour’s coming to
restore the kingdom of God in Israel, shall try every man’s doctrine, by
judging which are gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; and
then they that have built false consequences on the true foundation,
shall see their doctrines condemned; nevertheless they themselves shall
be saved, and pass unhurt through this universal fire, and live
eternally, to call upon the name of the true and only God. In which
sense there is nothing that accordeth not with the rest of Holy
Scripture, or any glimpse of the fire of purgatory.

[Sidenote: In what sense other articles may be called necessary.]

But a man may here ask, whether it be not as necessary to salvation, to
believe, that God is omnipotent; Creator of the world; that Jesus Christ
is risen; and that all men else shall rise again from the dead at the
last day; as to believe that _Jesus is the Christ_. To which I answer,
they are; and so are many more articles: but they are such, as are
contained in this one, and may be deduced from it, with more or less
difficulty. For who is there that does not see, that they who believe
Jesus to be the Son of the God of Israel, and that the Israelites had
for God the Omnipotent Creator of all things, do therein also believe,
that God is the Omnipotent Creator of all things? Or how can a man
believe, that Jesus is the king that shall reign eternally, unless he
believe him also risen again from the dead? For a dead man cannot
exercise the office of a king. In sum, he that holdeth this foundation,
_Jesus is the Christ_, holdeth expressly all that he seeth rightly
deduced from it, and implicitly all that is consequent thereunto, though
he have not skill enough to discern the consequence. And therefore it
holdeth still good, that the belief of this one article is sufficient
faith to obtain remission of sins to the _penitent_, and consequently to
bring them into the kingdom of heaven.

[Sidenote: That faith and obedience are both of them necessary to
           salvation.]

Now that I have shown, that all the obedience required to salvation,
consisteth in the will to obey the law of God, that is to say, in
repentance; and all the faith required to the same, is comprehended in
the belief of this article, _Jesus is the Christ_; I will further allege
those places of the Gospel, that prove, that all that is necessary to
salvation is contained in both these joined together. The men to whom
St. Peter preached on the day of Pentecost, next after the ascension of
our Saviour, asked him, and the rest of the apostles, saying, (_Acts_
ii. 37), _Men and brethren, what shall we do?_ To whom St. Peter
answered (in the next verse) _Repent, and be baptized every one of you,
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost_. Therefore repentance, and baptism, that is, believing that
_Jesus is the Christ_, is all that is necessary to salvation. Again, our
Saviour being asked by a certain ruler (_Luke_ xviii. 18), _What shall I
do to inherit eternal life?_ answered, (verse 20) _Thou knowest the
commandments, do not commit adultery, do not kill, do not steal, do not
bear false witness, honour thy father and thy mother_. Which when he
said he had observed, our Saviour added, (verse 22) _Sell all thou hast,
give it to the poor, and come and follow me_: which was as much as to
say, rely on me that am the king. Therefore to fulfil the law, and to
believe that Jesus is the king, is all that is required to bring a man
to eternal life. Thirdly, St. Paul saith (_Rom._ i. 17), _The just shall
live by faith_; not every one, but the _just_; therefore _faith_ and
_justice_ (that is, the _will to be just_, or _repentance_) are all that
is necessary to life eternal. And (_Mark_ i. 15) our Saviour preached,
saying, _The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand,
repent and believe the evangile_, that is, the good news that the Christ
was come. Therefore, to repent, and to believe that Jesus is the Christ,
is all that is required to salvation.

[Sidenote: What each of them contributes thereunto]

Seeing then it is necessary that faith and obedience, implied in the
word repentance, do both concur to our salvation; the question by which
of the two we are justified, is impertinently disputed. Nevertheless, it
will not be impertinent, to make manifest in what manner each of them
contributes thereunto; and in what sense it is said, that we are to be
justified by the one, and by the other. And first, if by righteousness
be understood the justice of the works themselves, there is no man that
can be saved; for there is none that hath not transgressed the law of
God. And therefore when we are said to be justified by works, it is to
be understood of the will, which God doth always accept for the work
itself, as well in good, as in evil men. And in this sense only it is,
that a man is called _just_, or _unjust_; and that his justice justifies
him, that is, gives him the title, in God’s acceptation, of _just_; and
renders him capable of _living by his faith_, which before he was not.
So that justice justifies in that sense, in which to _justify_, is the
same as that to _denominate a man just_; and not in the signification of
discharging the law; whereby the punishment of his sins should be
unjust.

But a man is then also said to be justified, when his plea, though in
itself insufficient, is accepted; as when we plead our will, our
endeavour to fulfil the law, and repent us of our failings, and God
accepteth it for the performance itself. And because God accepteth not
the will for the deed, but only in the faithful; it is therefore faith
that makes good our plea; and in this sense it is, that faith only
justifies. So that _faith_ and _obedience_ are both necessary to
salvation; yet in several senses each of them is said to justify.

[Sidenote: Obedience to God and to the civil sovereign not inconsistent,
           whether Christian, or infidel.]

Having thus shown what is necessary to salvation; it is not hard to
reconcile our obedience to God, with our obedience to the civil
sovereign; who is either Christian, or infidel. If he be a Christian, he
alloweth the belief of this article, that _Jesus is the Christ_; and of
all the articles that are contained in, or are by evident consequence
deduced from it: which is all the faith necessary to salvation. And
because he is a sovereign, he requireth obedience to all his own, that
is, to all the civil laws; in which also are contained all the laws of
nature, that is all the laws of God: for besides the laws of nature, and
the laws of the Church, which are part of the civil law, (for the Church
that can make laws is the commonwealth), there be no other laws divine.
Whosoever therefore obeyeth his Christian sovereign, is not thereby
hindered, neither from believing, nor from obeying God. But suppose that
a Christian king should from this foundation _Jesus is the Christ_, draw
some false consequences, that is to say, make some superstructions of
hay or stubble, and command the teaching of the same; yet seeing St.
Paul says he shall be saved; much more shall he be saved, that teacheth
them by his command; and much more yet, he that teaches not, but only
believes his lawful teacher. And in case a subject be forbidden by the
civil sovereign to profess some of those his opinions, upon what just
ground can he disobey? Christian kings may err in deducing a
consequence, but who shall judge? Shall a private man judge, when the
question is of his own obedience? Or shall any man judge but he that is
appointed thereto by the Church, that is, by the civil sovereign that
representeth it? Or if the pope, or an apostle judge, may he not err in
deducing of a consequence? Did not one of the two, St. Peter or St.
Paul, err in a superstructure, when St. Paul withstood St. Peter to his
face? There can therefore be no contradiction between the laws of God,
and the laws of a Christian commonwealth.

[Sidenote: Or infidel.]

And when the civil sovereign is an infidel, every one of his own
subjects that resisteth him, sinneth against the laws of God, (for such
are the laws of nature), and rejecteth the counsel of the apostles, that
admonisheth all Christians to obey their princes, and all children and
servants to obey their parents and masters in all things. And for their
_faith_, it is internal, and invisible; they have the license that
Naaman had, and need not put themselves into danger for it. But if they
do, they ought to expect their reward in heaven, and not complain of
their lawful sovereign; much less make war upon him. For he that is not
glad of any just occasion of martyrdom, has not the faith he professeth,
but pretends it only, to set some colour upon his own contumacy. But
what infidel king is so unreasonable, as knowing he has a subject, that
waiteth for the second coming of Christ, after the present world shall
be burnt, and intendeth then to obey him, (which is the intent of
believing that Jesus is the Christ,) and in the mean time thinketh
himself bound to obey the laws of that infidel king, (which all
Christians are obliged in conscience to do), to put to death or to
persecute such a subject?

[Sidenote: Conclusion.]

And thus much shall suffice, concerning the kingdom of God, and policy
ecclesiastical. Wherein I pretend not to advance any position of my own,
but only to show what are the consequences that seem to me deducible
from the principles of Christian politics, (which are the holy
Scriptures,) in confirmation of the power of civil sovereigns, and the
duty of their subjects. And in the allegation of Scripture, I have
endeavoured to avoid such texts as are of obscure or controverted
interpretation; and to allege none, but in such sense as is most plain,
and agreeable to the harmony and scope of the whole Bible; which was
written for the re-establishment of the kingdom of God in Christ. For it
is not the bare words, but the scope of the writer, that giveth the true
light, by which any writing is to be interpreted; and they that insist
upon single texts, without considering the main design, can derive
nothing from them clearly; but rather by casting atoms of Scripture, as
dust before men’s eyes, make every thing more obscure than it is; an
ordinary artifice of those that seek not the truth, but their own
advantage.




                                PART IV.

                                   OF
                        THE KINGDOM OF DARKNESS.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XLIV.

             OF SPIRITUAL DARKNESS, FROM MISINTERPRETATION
                             OF SCRIPTURE.


[Sidenote: The kingdom of Darkness, what.]

Besides these sovereign powers, _divine_, and _human_, of which I have
hitherto discoursed, there is mention in Scripture of another power,
namely, (_Eph._ vi. 12) that of _the rulers of the darkness of this
world_; (_Matth._ xii. 26) _the kingdom of Satan_; and (_Matth._ ix. 34)
_the principality of Beelzebub over demons_, that is to say, over
phantasms that appear in the air: for which cause Satan is also called,
(_Eph._ ii. 2) _the prince of the power of the air_; and, because he
ruleth in the darkness of this world, (_John_ xvi. 11) _the prince of
this world_: and in consequence hereunto, they who are under his
dominion, in opposition to the faithful, (who are the _children of the
light_,) are called the _children of darkness_. For seeing Beelzebub is
prince of phantasms, inhabitants of his dominion of air and darkness,
the children of darkness, and these demons, phantasms, or spirits of
illusion, signify allegorically the same thing. This considered, the
kingdom of darkness, as it is set forth in these and other places of the
Scripture, is nothing else but a _confederacy of deceivers, that to
obtain dominion over men in this present world, endeavour by dark and
erroneous doctrines, to extinguish in them the light, both of nature,
and of the gospel; and so to disprepare them for the kingdom of God to
come_.

[Sidenote: The Church not yet fully freed of darkness.]

As men that are utterly deprived from their nativity, of the light of
the bodily eye, have no idea at all of any such light; and no man
conceives in his imagination any greater light, than he hath at some
time or other perceived by his outward senses: so also is it of the
light of the gospel, and of the light of the understanding, that no man
can conceive there is any greater degree of it, than that which he hath
already attained unto. And from hence it comes to pass, that men have no
other means to acknowledge their own darkness, but only by reasoning
from the unforeseen mischances, that befall them in their ways. The
darkest part of the kingdom of Satan, is that which is without the
Church of God; that is to say, amongst them that believe not in Jesus
Christ. But we cannot say, that therefore the Church enjoyeth, as the
land of Goshen, all the light, which to the performance of the work
enjoined us by God, is necessary. Whence comes it, that in Christendom
there has been, almost from the time of the Apostles, such justling of
one another out of their places, both by foreign and civil war; such
stumbling at every little asperity of their own fortune, and every
little eminence of that of other men; and such diversity of ways in
running to the same mark, _felicity_, if it be not night amongst us, or
at least a mist? We are therefore yet in the dark.

[Sidenote: Four causes of spiritual darkness.]

The enemy has been here in the night of our natural ignorance, and sown
the tares of spiritual errors; and that, first, by abusing, and putting
out the light of the Scriptures: for we err, not knowing the Scriptures.
Secondly, by introducing the demonology of the heathen poets, that is to
say, their fabulous doctrine concerning demons, which are but idols, or
phantasms of the brain, without any real nature of their own, distinct
from human fancy; such as are dead men’s ghosts, and fairies, and other
matter of old wives’ tales. Thirdly, by mixing with the Scripture divers
relics of the religion, and much of the vain and erroneous philosophy,
of the Greeks, especially of Aristotle. Fourthly, by mingling with both
these, false, or uncertain traditions, and feigned, or uncertain
history. And so we come to err, _by giving heed to seducing spirits_,
and the demonology of such _as speak lies in hypocrisy_; or as it is in
the original, (_1 Tim._ iv. 1, 2) _of those that play the part of liars,
with a seared conscience_, that is, contrary to their own knowledge.
Concerning the first of these, which is the seducing of men by abuse of
Scripture, I intend to speak briefly in this chapter.

[Sidenote: Errors from misinterpreting the Scriptures, concerning the
           kingdom of God:]

The greatest and main abuse of Scripture, and to which almost all the
rest are either consequent or subservient, is the wresting of it, to
prove that the kingdom of God, mentioned so often in the Scripture, is
the present Church, or multitude of Christian men now living, or that
being dead, are to rise again at the last day: whereas the kingdom of
God was first instituted by the ministry of Moses, over the Jews only;
who were therefore called his peculiar people; and ceased afterward, in
the election of Saul, when they refused to be governed by God any more,
and demanded a king after the manner of the nations; which God himself
consented unto, as I have more at large proved before in chapter XXXV.
After that time, there was no other kingdom of God in the world, by any
pact, or otherwise, than he ever was, is, and shall be king of all men,
and of all creatures, as governing according to his will, by his
infinite power. Nevertheless, he promised by his prophets to restore
this his government to them again, when the time he hath in his secret
counsel appointed for it shall be fully come, and when they shall turn
unto him by repentance and amendment of life. And not only so, but he
invited the Gentiles to come in, and enjoy the happiness of his reign,
on the same conditions of conversion and repentance; and he promised
also to send his Son into the world, to expiate the sins of them all by
his death, and to prepare them by his doctrine, to receive him at his
second coming. Which second coming not yet being, the kingdom of God is
not yet come, and we are not now under any other kings by pact, but our
civil sovereigns; saving only, that Christian men are already in the
kingdom of grace, in as much as they have already the promise of being
received at his coming again.

[Sidenote: As that the kingdom of God is the present Church]

Consequent to this error, that the present Church is Christ’s kingdom,
there ought to be some one man, or assembly, by whose mouth our Saviour,
now in heaven, speaketh, giveth law, and which representeth his person
to all Christians; or divers men, or divers assemblies that do the same
to divers parts of Christendom. This power regal under Christ, being
challenged, universally by the Pope, and in particular commonwealths by
assemblies of the pastors of the place, (when the Scripture gives it to
none but to civil sovereigns,) comes to be so passionately disputed,
that it putteth out the light of nature, and causeth so great a darkness
in men’s understanding, that they see not who it is to whom they have
engaged their obedience.

[Sidenote: And that the Pope is his vicar general:]

Consequent to this claim of the Pope to be vicar-general of Christ in
the present Church, (supposed to be that kingdom of his to which we are
addressed in the gospel,) is the doctrine, that it is necessary for a
Christian king to receive his crown by a bishop; as if it were from that
ceremony, that he derives the clause of _Dei gratia_ in his title; and
that then only he is made king by the favour of God, when he is crowned
by the authority of God’s universal vicegerent on earth; and that every
bishop, whosoever be his sovereign, taketh at his consecration an oath
of absolute obedience to the Pope. Consequent to the same, is the
doctrine of the fourth Council of Lateran, held under Pope Innocent the
Third, (chap. III. _De Hereticis_), _that if a king at the Pope’s
admonition, do not purge his kingdom of heresies, and being
excommunicate for the same, do not give satisfaction within a year, his
subjects are absolved of the bond of their obedience_. Where, by
heresies are understood all opinions which the Church of Rome hath
forbidden to be maintained. And by this means, as often as there is any
repugnancy between the political designs of the Pope, and other
Christian princes, as there is very often, there ariseth such a mist
amongst their subjects, that they know not a stranger that thrusteth
himself into the throne of their lawful prince, from him whom they had
themselves placed there; and in this darkness of mind, are made to fight
one against another, without discerning their enemies from their
friends, under the conduct of another man’s ambition.

[Sidenote: And that the pastors are the clergy.]

From the same opinion, that the present Church is the kingdom of God, it
proceeds that pastors, deacons, and all other ministers of the Church,
take the name to themselves of the _clergy_; giving to other Christians
the name of _laity_, that is, simply _people_. For clergy signifies
those, whose maintenance is that revenue, which God having reserved to
himself during his reign over the Israelites, assigned to the tribe of
Levi, (who were to be his public ministers, and had no portion of land
set them out to live on, as their brethren,) to be their inheritance.
The Pope therefore, pretending the present Church to be, as the realm of
Israel, the kingdom of God, challenging to himself and his subordinate
ministers, the like revenue, as the inheritance of God, the name of
clergy was suitable to that claim. And thence it is, that tithes, and
other tributes paid to the Levites, as God’s right, amongst the
Israelites, have a long time been demanded, and taken of Christians, by
ecclesiastics, _jure divino_, that is, in God’s right. By which means,
the people every where were obliged to a double tribute; one to the
state, another to the clergy; whereof, that to the clergy, being the
tenth of their revenue, is double to that which a king of Athens, and
esteemed a tyrant, exacted of his subjects for the defraying of all
public charges: for he demanded no more but the twentieth part, and yet
abundantly maintained therewith the commonwealth. And in the kingdom of
the Jews, during the sacerdotal reign of God, the tithes and offerings
were the whole public revenue.

[Sidenote: And that the pastors are the clergy.]

From the same mistaking of the present Church for the kingdom of God,
came in the distinction between the _civil_ and the _canon_ laws: the
civil law being the acts of _sovereigns_ in their own dominions, and the
canon law being the acts of the _Pope_ in the same dominion. Which
canons, though they were but canons, that is, _rules propounded_, and
but voluntarily received by Christian princes, till the translation of
the empire to Charlemagne; yet afterwards, as the power of the Pope
increased, became _rules commanded_, and the emperors themselves, to
avoid greater mischiefs, which the people blinded might be led into,
were forced to let them pass for laws.

From hence it is, that in all dominions where the Pope’s ecclesiastical
power is entirely received, Jews, Turks, and Gentiles, are in the Roman
Church tolerated in their religion, as far forth, as in the exercise and
profession thereof they offend not against the civil power: whereas in a
Christian, though a stranger, not to be of the Roman religion, is
capital; because the Pope pretendeth, that all Christians, are his
subjects. For otherwise it were as much against the law of nations, to
persecute a Christian stranger, for professing the religion of his own
country, as an infidel; or rather more, in as much as they that are not
against Christ, are with him.

From the same it is, that in every Christian state there are certain
men, that are exempt, by ecclesiastical liberty, from the tributes, and
from the tribunals of the civil state; for so are the secular clergy,
besides monks and friars, which in many places bear so great a
proportion to the common people, as if need were, there might be raised
out of them alone, an army, sufficient for any war the Church militant
should employ them in, against their own, or other princes.

[Sidenote: Error from mistaking consecration for conjuration.]

A second general abuse of Scripture, is the turning of consecration into
conjuration, or enchantment. To _consecrate_, is, in Scripture, to
offer, give, or dedicate, in pious and decent language and gesture, a
man, or any other thing to God, by separating of it from common use;
that is to say, to sanctify, or make it God’s, and to be used only by
those, whom God hath appointed to be his public ministers, (as I have
already proved at large in the XXXVth chapter,) and thereby to change,
not the thing consecrated, but only the use of it, from being profane
and common, to be holy, and peculiar to God’s service. But when by such
words, the nature or quality of the thing itself, is pretended to be
changed, it is not consecration, but either an extraordinary work of
God, or a vain and impious conjuration. But seeing, for the frequency of
pretending the change of nature in their consecrations, it cannot be
esteemed a work extraordinary, it is no other than a _conjuration_ or
_incantation_, whereby they would have men to believe an alteration of
nature that is not, contrary to the testimony of man’s sight, and of all
the rest of his senses. As for example, when the priest, instead of
consecrating bread and wine to God’s peculiar service in the sacrament
of the Lord’s Supper, (which is but a separation of it from the common
use, to signify, that is, to put men in mind of their redemption, by the
passion of Christ, whose body was broken, and blood shed upon the cross
for our transgressions,) pretends, that by saying of the words of our
Saviour, _This is my body_, and _this is my blood_, the nature of bread
is no more there, but his very body; notwithstanding there appeareth not
to the sight, or other sense of the receiver, any thing that appeared
not before the consecration. The Egyptian conjurers, that are said to
have turned their rods to serpents, and the water into blood, are
thought but to have deluded the senses of the spectators, by a false
show of things, yet are esteemed enchanters. But what should we have
thought of them, if there had appeared in their rods nothing like a
serpent, and in the water enchanted, nothing like blood, nor like any
thing else but water, but that they had faced down the king, that they
were serpents that looked like rods, and that it was blood that seemed
water? That had been both enchantment, and lying. And yet in this daily
act of the priest, they do the very same, by turning the holy words into
the manner of a charm, which produceth nothing new to the sense; but
they face us down, that it hath turned the bread into a man; nay more,
into a God; and require men to worship it, as if it were our Saviour
himself present God and man, and thereby to commit most gross idolatry.
For if it be enough to excuse it of idolatry, to say it is no more
bread, but God; why should not the same excuse serve the Egyptians, in
case they had the faces to say, the leeks and onions they worshipped,
were not very leeks and onions, but a divinity under their _species_, or
likeness. The words, _This is my body_, are equivalent to these, _this
signifies_, or _represents my body_; and it is an ordinary figure of
speech: but to take it literally, is an abuse; nor though so taken, can
it extend any further, than to the bread which Christ himself with his
own hands consecrated. For he never said, that of what bread soever, any
priest whatsoever, should say, _This is my body_, or, _this is Christ’s
body_, the same should presently be transubstantiated. Nor did the
Church of Rome ever establish this transubstantiation, till the time of
Innocent the Third; which was not above 500 years ago, when the power of
popes was at the highest, and the darkness of the time grown so great,
as men discerned not the bread that was given them to eat, especially
when it was stamped with the figure of Christ upon the cross, as if they
would have men believe it were transubstantiated, not only into the body
of Christ, but also into the wood of his cross, and that they did eat
both together in the sacrament.

[Sidenote: Incantation in the ceremonies of baptism:]

The like incantation, instead of consecration, is used also in the
sacrament of baptism: where the abuse of God’s name in each several
person, and in the whole Trinity, with the sign of the cross at each
name, maketh up the charm. As first, when they make the holy water, the
priest saith, _I conjure thee, thou creature of water, in the name of
God the Father Almighty, and in the name of Jesus Christ his only Son
our Lord, and in virtue of the Holy Ghost, that thou become conjured
water, to drive away all the powers of the enemy, and to eradicate, and
supplant the enemy, &c._ And the same in the benediction of the salt to
be mingled with it: _That thou become conjured salt, that all phantasms,
and knavery of the devil’s fraud may fly and depart from the place
wherein thou art sprinkled; and every unclean spirit be conjured by Him
that shall come to judge the quick and the dead_. The same in the
benediction of the oil; _That all the power of the enemy, all the host
of the devil, all assaults and phantasms of Satan, may be driven away by
this creature of oil_. And for the infant that is to be baptized, he is
subject to many charms: first, at the church door the priest blows
thrice in the child’s face, and says: _Go out of him unclean spirit, and
give place to the Holy Ghost the comforter_. As if all children, till
blown on by the priest, were demoniacs. Again, before his entrance into
the church, he saith as before, _I conjure thee, &c. to go out, and
depart from this servant of God_. And again the same exorcism is
repeated once more before he be baptized. These, and some other
incantations, are those that are used instead of benedictions, and
consecrations, in administration of the sacraments of baptism, and the
Lord’s supper; wherein every thing that serveth to those holy uses,
except the unhallowed spittle of the priest, hath some set form of
exorcism.

[Sidenote: And in marriage, in visitation of the sick, and in
           consecration of places.]

Nor are the other rites, as of marriage, of extreme unction, of
visitation of the sick, of consecrating churches and churchyards, and
the like, exempt from charms; inasmuch as there is in them the use of
enchanted oil and water, with the abuse of the cross, and of the holy
word of David, _asperges me Domine hyssopo_, as things of efficacy to
drive away phantasms, and imaginary spirits.

[Sidenote: Errors from mistaking eternal life, and everlasting death:]

Another general error, is from the misinterpretation of the words
_eternal life_, _everlasting death_, and the _second death_. For though
we read plainly in Holy Scripture, that God created Adam in an estate of
living for ever, which was conditional, that is to say, if he disobeyed
not his commandment; which was not essential to human nature, but
consequent to the virtue of the tree of life; whereof he had liberty to
eat, as long as he had not sinned; and that he was thrust out of
Paradise after he had sinned, lest he should eat thereof, and live for
ever; and that Christ’s Passion is a discharge of sin to all that
believe on him; and by consequence, a restitution of eternal life to all
the faithful, and to them only: yet the doctrine is now, and hath been a
long time far otherwise; namely, that every man hath eternity of life by
nature, inasmuch as his soul is immortal. So that the flaming sword at
the entrance of Paradise, though it hinder a man from coming to the tree
of life, hinders him not from the immortality which God took from him
for his sin; nor makes him to need the sacrificing of Christ, for the
recovering of the same; and consequently, not only the faithful and
righteous, but also the wicked and the heathen, shall enjoy eternal
life, without any death at all; much less a second, and everlasting
death. To salve this, it is said, that by second, and everlasting death,
is meant a second, and everlasting life, but in torments; a figure never
used but in this very case.

All which doctrine is founded only on some of the obscurer places of the
New Testament; which nevertheless, the whole scope of the Scripture
considered, are clear enough in a different sense, and unnecessary to
the Christian faith. For supposing that when a man dies, there remaineth
nothing of him but his carcass; cannot God, that raised inanimated dust
and clay into a living creature by his word, as easily raise a dead
carcass to life again, and continue him alive for ever, or make him die
again, by another word? The _soul_ in Scripture, signifieth always,
either the life, or the living creature; and the body and soul jointly,
the _body alive_. In the fifth day of the creation, God said: Let the
waters produce _reptile animæ viventis_, the creeping thing that hath in
it a living soul; the English translate it, _that hath life_. And again,
God created whales, _et omnem animam viventem_; which in the English is,
_every living creature_. And likewise of man, God made him of the dust
of the earth, and breathed in his face the breath of life, _et factus
est homo in animam viventem_, that is, _and man was made a living
creature_. And after Noah came out of the ark, God saith, he will no
more smite _omnem animam viventem_, that is, _every living creature_.
And (_Deut._ xii. 23), _Eat not the blood, for the blood is the soul_;
that is, _the life_. From which places, if by _soul_ were meant a
_substance incorporeal_, with an existence separated from the body, it
might as well be inferred of any other living creature as of man. But
that the souls of the faithful, are not of their own nature, but by
God’s special grace, to remain in their bodies, from the resurrection to
all eternity, I have already, I think, sufficiently proved out of the
Scriptures, in chapter XXXVIII. And for the places of the New Testament,
where it is said that any man shall be cast body and soul into hell
fire, it is no more than body and life; that is to say, they shall be
cast alive into the perpetual fire of Gehenna.

[Sidenote: As the doctrine of purgatory, and exorcisms, and invocation
           of saints.]

This window it is, that gives entrance to the dark doctrine, first, of
eternal torments; and afterwards of purgatory, and consequently of the
walking abroad, especially in places consecrated, solitary, or dark, of
the ghosts of men deceased; and thereby to the pretences of exorcism and
conjuration of phantasms; as also of invocation of men dead; and to the
doctrine of indulgences, that is to say, of exemption for a time, or for
ever, from the fire of purgatory, wherein these incorporeal substances
are pretended by burning to be cleansed, and made fit for heaven. For
men being generally possessed before the time of our Saviour, by
contagion of the demonology of the Greeks, of an opinion, that the souls
of men were substances distinct from their bodies, and therefore that
when the body was dead, the soul of every man, whether godly or wicked,
must subsist somewhere by virtue of its own nature, without
acknowledging therein any supernatural gift of God; the doctors of the
Church doubted a long time, what was the place, which they were to abide
in, till they should be reunited to their bodies in the resurrection;
supposing for a while, they lay under the altars; but afterward the
Church of Rome found it more profitable to build for them this place of
purgatory; which by some other Churches in this latter age has been
demolished.

[Sidenote: The texts alleged for the doctrines aforementioned have been
           answered before.]

Let us now consider what texts of Scripture seem most to confirm these
three general errors, I have here touched. As for those which Cardinal
Bellarmine hath alleged, for the present kingdom of God administered by
the Pope, than which there are none that make a better show of proof; I
have already answered them; and made it evident, that the kingdom of
God, instituted by Moses, ended in the election of Saul; after which
time the priest of his own authority never deposed any king. That which
the high-priest did to Athaliah, was not done in his own right, but in
the right of the young king Joash her son: but Solomon in his own right
deposed the high-priest Abiathar, and set up another in his place. The
most difficult place to answer, of all those that can be brought to
prove the kingdom of God by Christ is already in this world, is alleged,
not by Bellarmine, nor any other of the Church of Rome; but by Beza,
that will have it to begin from the resurrection of Christ. But whether
he intend thereby, to entitle the Presbytery to the supreme power
ecclesiastical in the commonwealth of Geneva, and consequently to every
presbytery in every other commonwealth, or to princes, and other civil
sovereigns, I do not know. For the presbytery hath challenged the power
to excommunicate their own kings, and to be the supreme moderators in
religion, in the places where they have that form of Church-government,
no less than the Pope challengeth it universally.

[Sidenote: Answer to the text on which Beza inferreth that the kingdom
           of Christ began at the resurrection.]

The words are (_Mark_ ix. 1), _Verily I say unto you, that there be some
of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they have
seen the kingdom of God come with power_. Which words if taken
grammatically, make it certain, that either some of those men that stood
by Christ at that time, are yet alive; or else, that the kingdom of God
must be now in this present world. And then there is another place more
difficult. For when the apostles, after our Saviour’s resurrection, and
immediately before his ascension, asked our Saviour, saying, (_Acts_ i.
6), _Wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?_ he
answered them, _It is not for you to know the times and the seasons,
which the Father hath put in his own power; but ye shall receive power
by the coming of the Holy Ghost upon you, and ye shall be my (martyrs)
witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto
the uttermost part of the earth_. Which is as much as to say, My kingdom
is not yet come, nor shall you foreknow when it shall come; for it shall
come as a thief in the night; but I will send you the Holy Ghost, and by
him you shall have power to bear witness to all the world, by your
preaching, of my resurrection, and the works I have done, and the
doctrine I have taught, that they may believe in me, and expect eternal
life, at my coming again. How does this agree with the coming of
Christ’s kingdom at the resurrection? And that which St. Paul says (_1
Thess._ i. 9, 10), _That they turned from idols, to serve the living and
true God, and to wait for his Son from heaven_; where to wait for his
Son from heaven, is to wait for his coming to be king in power; which
were not necessary, if his kingdom had been then present. Again, if the
kingdom of God began, as Beza on that place (_Mark_ ix. 1) would have
it, at the resurrection; what reason is there for Christians ever since
the resurrection to say in their prayers, _Let thy kingdom come_? It is
therefore manifest, that the words of St. Mark are not so to be
interpreted. There be some of them that stand here, saith our Saviour,
that shall not taste of death till they have seen the kingdom of God
come in power. If then this kingdom were to come at the resurrection of
Christ, why is it said, _some of them_, rather than _all_? For they all
lived till after Christ was risen.

[Sidenote: Explication of the place in Mark ix. 1.]

But they that require an exact interpretation of this text, let them
interpret first the like words of our Saviour to St. Peter, concerning
St. John, (chap. xxi. 22), _If I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee?_ upon which was grounded a report that he should not die.
Nevertheless the truth of that report was neither confirmed, as well
grounded; nor refuted, as ill grounded on those words; but left as a
saying not understood. The same difficulty is also in the place of _St.
Mark_. And if it be lawful to conjecture at their meaning, by that which
immediately follows, both here, and in _St. Luke_, where the same is
again repeated, it is not improbable, to say they have relation to the
Transfiguration, which is described in the verses immediately following:
where it is said, that _after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter, and
James, and John_ (not all, but some of his disciples), _and leadeth them
up into a high mountain apart by themselves, and was transfigured before
them: and his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no
fuller on earth can white them: and there appeared unto them, Elias with
Moses, and they were talking with Jesus, &c._ So that they saw Christ in
glory and majesty, as he is to come; insomuch as _they were sore
afraid_. And thus the promise of our Saviour was accomplished by way of
_vision_. For it was a vision, as may probably be inferred out of _St.
Luke_, that reciteth the same story (chap. ix. 28, &c.), and saith, that
Peter and they that were with him, were heavy with sleep: but most
certainly out of _Matth._ xvii. 9, where the same is again related; for
our Saviour charged them, saying, _Tell no man the vision until the Son
of Man be risen from the dead_. Howsoever it be, yet there can from
thence be taken no argument, to prove that the kingdom of God taketh
beginning till the day of judgment.

[Sidenote: Abuse of some other texts in defence of the power of the
           Pope.]

As for some other texts, to prove the Pope’s power over civil
sovereigns, (besides those of Bellarmine,) as that the two swords that
Christ and his apostles had amongst them, were the spiritual and the
temporal sword, which they say St. Peter had given him by Christ: and,
that of the two luminaries, the greater signifies the Pope, and the
lesser the King; one might as well infer out of the first verse of the
Bible, that by heaven is meant the Pope, and by earth the King. Which is
not arguing from Scripture, but a wanton insulting over princes, that
came in fashion after the time the Popes were grown so secure of their
greatness, as to contemn all Christian kings; and treading on the necks
of emperors, to mock both them and the Scripture, in the words of Psalm
XCI. 13, _Thou shalt tread upon the lion and the adder; the young lion
and the dragon thou shalt trample under thy feet_.

[Sidenote: The manner of consecrations in the Scripture, was without
           exorcisms.]

As for the rights of consecration, though they depend for the most part
upon the discretion and judgment of the governors of the Church, and not
upon the Scriptures; yet those governors are obliged to such direction,
as the nature of the action itself requireth; as that the ceremonies,
words, and gestures, be both decent and significant, or at least
conformable to the action. When Moses consecrated the tabernacle, the
altar, and the vessels belonging to them, (_Exod._ xl. 9), he anointed
them with the oil which God had commanded to be made for that purpose:
and they were holy: there was nothing exorcised, to drive away
phantasms. The same Moses, the civil sovereign of Israel, when he
consecrated Aaron, the high-priest, and his sons, did wash them with
water, not exorcised water, put their garments upon them, and anointed
them with oil; and they were sanctified, to minister unto the Lord in
the priest’s office; which was a simple and decent cleansing, and
adorning them, before he presented them to God, to be his servants. When
king Solomon, the civil sovereign of Israel, consecrated the temple he
had built, (_1 Kings_ viii.), he stood before all the congregation of
Israel; and having blessed them, he gave thanks to God, for putting into
the heart of his father to build it; and for giving to himself the grace
to accomplish the same; and then prayed unto him, first, to accept that
house, though it were not suitable to his infinite greatness; and to
hear the prayers of his servants that should pray therein, or, if they
were absent, towards it; and lastly, he offered a sacrifice of
peace-offering, and the house was dedicated. Here was no procession; the
king stood still in his first place; no exorcised water; no _Asperges
me_, nor other impertinent application of words spoken upon another
occasion; but a decent and rational speech, and such as in making to God
a present of his new-built house, was most conformable to the occasion.

We read not that St. John did exorcise the water of Jordan; nor Philip
the water of the river wherein he baptized the Eunuch; nor that any
pastor in the time of the apostles, did take his spittle, and put it to
the nose of the person to be baptized, and say, _in odorem suavitatis_,
that is, _for a sweet savour unto the Lord_; wherein neither the
ceremony of spittle, for the uncleanness; nor the application of that
Scripture for the levity, can by any authority of man be justified.

[Sidenote: The immortality of man’s soul, not proved by Scripture to be
           of nature, but of grace.]

To prove that the soul separated from the body, liveth eternally, not
only the souls of the elect, by especial grace, and restoration of the
eternal life which Adam lost by sin, and our Saviour restored by the
sacrifice of himself, to the faithful; but also the souls of reprobates,
as a property naturally consequent to the essence of mankind, without
other grace of God, but that which is universally given to all mankind;
there are divers places, which at the first sight seem sufficiently to
serve the turn: but such, as when I compare them with that which I have
before (chapter XXXVIII.) alleged out of the 14th of _Job_, seem to me
much more subject to a diverse interpretation, than the words of Job.

And first there are the words of Solomon (_Eccles._ xii. 7), _Then shall
the dust return to dust, as it was, and the spirit shall return to God
that gave it_. Which may bear well enough, if there be no other text
directly against it, this interpretation, that God only knows, but man
not, what becomes of a man’s spirit, when he expireth; and the same
Solomon, in the same book, (chapter iii. 20, 21) delivereth the same
sentence in the same sense I have given it. His words are: _All go_,
(man and beast), _to the same place; all are of the dust, and all turn
to dust again; who knoweth that the spirit of man goeth upward, and that
the spirit of the beast goeth downward to the earth?_ That is, none
knows but God; nor is it an unusual phrase to say of things we
understand not, _God knows what_, and, _God knows where_. That of
(_Gen._ v. 24) _Enoch walked with God, and he was not; for God took
him_; which is expounded, (_Heb._ xi. 5), _He was translated, that he
should not die; and was not found, because God had translated him. For
before his translation, he had this testimony, that he pleased God_;
making as much for the immortality of the body, as of the soul, proveth,
that this his translation was peculiar to them that please God; not
common to them with the wicked, and depending on grace, not on nature.
But on the contrary, what interpretation shall we give besides the
literal sense, of the words of Solomon (_Eccles._ iii. 19), _That which
befalleth the sons of men, befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth
them; as the one dieth, so doth the other; yea, they have all one
breath_, (one spirit); _so that a man hath no pre-eminence above a
beast, for all is vanity_. By the literal sense, here is no natural
immortality of the soul; nor yet any repugnancy with the life eternal,
which the elect shall enjoy by grace. And (_Eccles._ chap. iv. 3)
_Better is he that hath not yet been, than both they_; that is, than
they that live, or have lived; which, if the soul of all them that have
lived, were immortal, were a hard saying; for then to have an immortal
soul, were worse than to have no soul at all. And again, (chapter ix.
5), _The living know they shall die, but the dead know not any thing_;
that is, naturally, and before the resurrection of the body.

Another place which seems to make for a natural immortality of the soul,
is that, where our Saviour saith, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are
living: but this is spoken of the promise of God, and of their certitude
to rise again, not of a life then actual; and in the same sense that God
said to Adam, that on the day he should eat of the forbidden fruit, he
should certainly die; from that time forward he was a dead man by
sentence; but not by execution, till almost a thousand years after. So
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were alive by promise, then, when Christ
spake; but are not actually till the resurrection. And the history of
Dives and Lazarus, makes nothing against this, if we take it, as it is,
for a parable.

But there be other places of the New Testament, where an immortality
seemeth to be directly attributed to the wicked. For it is evident that
they shall all rise to judgment. And it is said besides in many places,
that they shall go into _everlasting fire, everlasting torments,
everlasting punishments; and that the worm of conscience never dieth_;
and all this is comprehended in the word _everlasting death_, which is
ordinarily interpreted _everlasting life in torments_. And yet I can
find no where that any man shall live in torments everlastingly. Also,
it seemeth hard, to say, that God who is the father of mercies; that
doth in heaven and earth all that he will; that hath the hearts of all
men in his disposing; that worketh in men both to do, and to will; and
without whose free gift a man hath neither inclination to good, nor
repentance of evil, should punish men’s transgressions without any end
of time, and with all the extremity of torture, that men can imagine,
and more. We are therefore to consider, what the meaning is, of
_everlasting fire_, and other the like phrases of Scripture.

I have showed already, that the kingdom of God by Christ beginneth at
the day of judgment: that in that day the faithful shall rise again,
with glorious and spiritual bodies, and be his subjects in that his
kingdom, which shall be eternal: that they shall neither marry nor be
given in marriage, nor eat and drink, as they did in their natural
bodies; but live for ever in their individual persons, without the
specifical eternity of generation: and that the reprobates also shall
rise again, to receive punishments for their sins: as also, that those
of the elect, which shall be alive in their earthly bodies at that day,
shall have their bodies suddenly changed, and made spiritual and
immortal. But that the bodies of the reprobate, who make the kingdom of
Satan, shall also be glorious, or spiritual bodies, or that they shall
be as the angels of God, neither eating, nor drinking, nor engendering;
or that their life shall be eternal in their individual persons, as the
life of every faithful man is, or as the life of Adam had been if he had
not sinned, there is no place of Scripture to prove it; save only these
places concerning eternal torments; which may otherwise be interpreted.

From whence may be inferred, that as the elect after the resurrection
shall be restored to the estate, wherein Adam was before he had sinned;
so the reprobate shall be in the estate, that Adam and his posterity
were in after the sin committed; saving that God promised a Redeemer to
Adam, and such of his seed as should trust in him, and repent; but not
to them that should die in their sins, as do the reprobate.

[Sidenote: Eternal torments, what.]

These things considered, the texts that mention _eternal fire, eternal
torments, or the worm that never dieth_, contradict not the doctrine of
a second, and everlasting death, in the proper and natural sense of the
word _death_. The fire, or torments prepared for the wicked in Gehenna,
Tophet, or in what place soever, may continue for ever; and there may
never want wicked men to be tormented in them; though not every, nor any
one eternally. For the wicked being left in the estate they were in
after Adam’s sin, may at the resurrection live as they did, marry, and
give in marriage, and have gross and corruptible bodies, as all mankind
now have; and consequently may engender perpetually, after the
resurrection, as they did before: for there is no place in Scripture to
the contrary. For St. Paul, speaking of the resurrection (_1 Cor._ xv.)
understandeth it only of the resurrection to life eternal; and not the
resurrection to punishment. And of the first, he saith, that the body is
_sown in corruption, raised in incorruption; sown in dishonour, raised
in honour; sown in weakness, raised in power; sown a natural body,
raised a spiritual body_. There is no such thing can be said of the
bodies of them that rise to punishment. So also our Saviour, when he
speaketh of the nature of man after the resurrection, meaneth the
resurrection to life eternal, not to punishment. The text is, _Luke_ xx.
verses 34, 35, 36, a fertile text: _The children of this world marry,
and are given in marriage; but they that shall be counted worthy to
obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry,
nor are given in marriage: neither can they die any more; for they are
equal to the angels, and are the children of God, being the children of
the resurrection_. The children of this world, that are in the estate
which Adam left them in, shall marry, and be given in marriage; that is,
corrupt, and generate successively; which is an immortality of the kind,
but not of the persons of men: they are not worthy to be counted amongst
them that shall obtain the next world, and an absolute resurrection from
the dead; but only a short time, as inmates of that world; and to the
end only to receive condign punishment for their contumacy. The elect
are the only children of the resurrection; that is to say, the sole
heirs of eternal life: they only can die no more, it is they that are
equal to the angels, and that are the children of God; and not the
reprobate. To the reprobate there remaineth after the resurrection, a
_second_ and _eternal_ death: between which resurrection, and their
second and eternal death, is but a time of punishment and torment; and
to last by succession of sinners thereunto, as long as the kind of man
by propagation shall endure; which is eternally.

[Sidenote: Answer of the texts alleged for purgatory.]

Upon this doctrine of the natural eternity of separated souls, is
founded, as I said, the doctrine of purgatory. For supposing eternal
life by grace only, there is no life but the life of the body; and no
immortality till the resurrection. The texts for purgatory alleged by
Bellarmine out of the canonical Scripture of the Old Testament, are,
first, the fasting of David for Saul and Jonathan, mentioned _2 Sam._ i.
12, and again, _2 Sam._ iii. 35, for the death of Abner. This fasting of
David, he saith, was for the obtaining of something for them at God’s
hands, after their death: because after he had fasted to procure the
recovery of his own child, as soon as he knew it was dead, he called for
meat. Seeing then the soul hath an existence separate from the body, and
nothing can be obtained by men’s fasting for the souls that are already
either in heaven, or hell, it followeth that there be some souls of dead
men, that are neither in heaven, nor in hell; and therefore they must be
in some third place, which must be purgatory. And thus with hard
straining, he has wrested those places to the proof of a purgatory:
whereas it is manifest, that the ceremonies of mourning, and fasting,
when they are used for the death of men, whose life was not profitable
to the mourners, they are used for honour’s sake to their persons; and
when it is done for the death of them by whose life the mourners had
benefit, it proceeds from their particular damage. And so David honoured
Saul and Abner, with his fasting; and in the death of his own child,
recomforted himself, by receiving his ordinary food.

In the other places, which he allegeth out of the Old Testament, there
is not so much as any show, or colour of proof. He brings in every text
wherein there is the word _anger_, or _fire_, or _burning_, or
_purging_, or _cleansing_, in case any of the fathers have but in a
sermon rhetorically applied it to the doctrine of purgatory, already
believed. The first verse of _Psalm_ xxxvii; _O Lord, rebuke me not in
thy wrath, nor chasten me in thy hot displeasure_: what were this to
purgatory, if Augustine had not applied the _wrath_ to the fire of hell,
and the _displeasure_ to that of purgatory? And what is it to purgatory,
that of _Psalm_ lxvi. 12, _We went through fire and water, and thou
broughtest us to a moist place_; and other the like texts, with which
the doctors of those times intended to adorn, or extend their sermons,
or commentaries, haled to their purposes by force of wit?

[Sidenote: Places of the New Testament for purgatory answered.]

But he allegeth other places of the New Testament, that are not so easy
to be answered. And first that of _Matth._ xii. 32: _Whosoever speaketh
a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever
speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him neither in
this world, nor in the world to come_: where he will have purgatory to
be the world to come, wherein some sins may be forgiven, which in this
world were not forgiven: notwithstanding that it is manifest, there are
but three worlds; one from the creation to the flood, which was
destroyed by water, and is called in Scripture _the old world_; another
from the flood, to the day of judgment, which is _the present world_,
and shall be destroyed by fire; and the third, which shall be from the
day of judgment forward, everlasting, which is called _the world to
come_; and in which it is agreed by all, there shall be no purgatory:
and therefore the world to come, and purgatory, are inconsistent. But
what then can be the meaning of those our Saviour’s words? I confess
they are very hardly to be reconciled with all the doctrines now
unanimously received: nor is it any shame, to confess the profoundness
of the Scripture to be too great to be sounded by the shortness of human
understanding. Nevertheless, I may propound such things to the
consideration of more learned divines, as the text itself suggesteth.
And first, seeing to speak against the Holy Ghost, as being the third
person of the Trinity, is to speak against the Church, in which the Holy
Ghost resideth; it seemeth the comparison is made, between the easiness
of our Saviour, in bearing with offences done to him while he himself
taught the world, that is, when he was on earth, and the severity of the
pastors after him, against those which should deny their authority,
which was from the Holy Ghost. As if he should say, you that deny my
power; nay you that shall crucify me, shall be pardoned by me, as often
as you turn unto me by repentance: but if you deny the power of them
that teach you hereafter, by virtue of the Holy Ghost, they shall be
inexorable, and shall not forgive you, but persecute you in this world,
and leave you without absolution, (though you turn to me, unless you
turn also to them), to the punishments, as much as lies in them, of the
world to come. And so the words may be taken as a prophecy, or
prediction concerning the times, as they have along been in the
Christian Church. Or if this be not the meaning, (for I am not
peremptory in such difficult places), perhaps there may be places left
after the resurrection, for the repentance of some sinners. And there is
also another place, that seemeth to agree therewith. For considering the
words of St. Paul (_1 Cor._ xv. 29), _What shall they do which are
baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all?_ why also are they
baptized for the dead? a man may probably infer, as some have done, that
in St. Paul’s time, there was a custom, by receiving baptism for the
dead, (as men that now believe, are sureties and undertakers for the
faith of infants, that are not capable of believing), to undertake for
the persons of their deceased friends, that they should be ready to
obey, and receive our Saviour for their king, at his coming again; and
then the forgiveness of sins in the world to come, has no need of a
purgatory. But in both these interpretations, there is so much of
paradox, that I trust not to them; but propound them to those that are
thoroughly versed in the Scripture, to inquire if there be no clearer
place that contradicts them. Only of thus much, I see evident Scripture,
to persuade me, that there is neither the word, nor the thing of
purgatory, neither in this, nor any other text; nor any thing that can
prove a necessity of a place for the soul without the body; neither for
the soul of Lazarus during the four days he was dead; nor for the souls
of them which the Roman Church pretend to be tormented now in purgatory.
For God, that could give a life to a piece of clay, hath the same power
to give life again to a dead man, and renew his inanimate, and rotten
carcase, into a glorious, spiritual, and immortal body.

Another place is that of _1 Cor._ iii., where it is said, that they
which build stubble, hay, &c. on the true foundation, their work shall
perish; but _they themselves shall be saved, but as through fire_: this
fire, he will have to be the fire of purgatory. The words, as I have
said before, are an allusion to those of _Zech._ xiii. 9, where he
saith, _I will bring the third part through the fire, and refine them as
silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried_: which is spoken
of the coming of the Messiah in power and glory; that is, at the day of
judgment, and conflagration of the present world; wherein the elect
shall not be consumed, but be refined; that is, depose their erroneous
doctrines and traditions, and have them as it were singed off; and shall
afterwards call upon the name of the true God. In like manner, the
apostle saith of them, that holding this foundation, _Jesus is the
Christ_, shall build thereon some other doctrines that be erroneous,
that they shall not be consumed in that fire which reneweth the world,
but shall pass through it to salvation; but so as to see, and relinquish
their former errors. The builders, are the _pastors_; the foundation,
that _Jesus is the Christ_; the stubble and hay, _false consequences
drawn from it through ignorance, or frailty_; the gold, silver, and
precious stones, are their _true doctrines_; and their refining or
purging, the _relinquishing of their errors_. In all which there is no
colour at all for the burning of incorporeal, that is to say, impatible
souls.

[Sidenote: Baptism for the dead, how understood.]

A third place is that of _1 Cor._ xv. 29, before mentioned, concerning
baptism for the dead: out of which he concludeth, first, that prayers
for the dead are not unprofitable; and out of that, that there is a fire
of purgatory: but neither of them rightly. For of many interpretations
of the word baptism, he approveth this in the first place, that by
baptism is meant, metaphorically, a baptism of penance; and that men are
in this sense baptized, when they fast, and pray, and give alms: and so,
baptism for the dead, and prayer for the dead, is the same thing. But
this is a metaphor, of which there is no example, neither in the
Scripture, nor in any other use of language; and which is also
discordant to the harmony, and scope of the Scripture. The word baptism
is used (_Mark_ x. 38, and _Luke_ xii. 50), for being dipped in one’s
own blood, as Christ was upon the cross, and as most of the apostles
were, for giving testimony of him. But it is hard to say, that prayer,
fasting, and alms, have any similitude with dipping. The same is used
also _Matth._ iii. 11 (which seemeth to make somewhat for purgatory) for
a purging with fire. But it is evident the fire and purging here
mentioned, is the same whereof the prophet Zechariah speaketh (chapter
xiii. 9) _I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine
them, &c._ And St. Peter after him (1 Epistle i. 7), _That the trial of
your faith, which is much more precious than of gold that perisheth,
though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and honour,
and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ_; and St. Paul (_1 Cor._ iii.
13), _The fire shall try every man’s work of what sort it is_. But St.
Peter and St. Paul speak of the fire that shall be at the second
appearing of Christ; and the prophet Zechariah of the day of judgment.
And therefore this place of St. Matthew may be interpreted of the same;
and then there will be no necessity of the fire of purgatory.

Another interpretation of baptism for the dead, is that which I have
before mentioned, which he preferreth to the second place of
probability: and thence also he inferreth the utility of prayer for the
dead. For if after the resurrection, such as have not heard of Christ,
or not believed in him, may be received into Christ’s kingdom; it is not
in vain, after their death, that their friends should pray for them,
till they should be risen. But granting that God, at the prayers of the
faithful, may convert unto him some of those that have not heard Christ
preached, and consequently cannot have rejected Christ, and that the
charity of men in that point cannot be blamed; yet this concludeth
nothing for purgatory; because to rise from death to life, is one thing;
to rise from purgatory to life is another; as being a rising from life
to life, from a life in torments to a life in joy.

A fourth place is that of _Matth._ v. 25, 26: _Agree with thine
adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him, lest at any time
the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to
the officer, and thou be cast into prison: verily I say unto thee, thou
shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost
farthing_. In which allegory, the offender is the _sinner_; both the
adversary and the judge is _God_; the way is this _life_; the prison is
the _grave_; the officer, _death_; from which, the sinner shall not rise
again to life eternal, but to a second death, till he have paid the
utmost farthing, or Christ pay it for him by his passion, which is a
full ransom for all manner of sins, as well lesser sins, as greater
crimes; both being made by the passion of Christ equally venial.

The fifth place, is that of _Matth._ v. 22: _Whosoever is angry with his
brother without a cause, shall be guilty in judgment: and whosoever
shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be guilty in the council: but
whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be guilty to hell fire_. From
which words he inferreth three sorts of sins, and three sorts of
punishments; and that none of those sins, but the last, shall be
punished with hell fire; and consequently, that after this life, there
is punishment of lesser sins in purgatory. Of which inference, there is
no colour in any interpretation that hath yet been given of them. Shall
there be a distinction after this life of courts of justice, as there
was amongst the Jews in our Saviour’s time, to hear, and determine
divers sorts of crimes, as the judges, and the council? Shall not all
judicature appertain to Christ and his apostles? To understand therefore
this text, we are not to consider it solitarily, but jointly with the
words precedent, and subsequent. Our Saviour in this chapter
interpreteth the law of Moses; which the Jews thought was then
fulfilled, when they had not transgressed the grammatical sense thereof,
howsoever they had transgressed against the sentence, or meaning of the
legislator. Therefore whereas they thought the sixth commandment was not
broken, but by killing a man: nor the seventh, but when a man lay with a
woman, not his wife; our Saviour tells them the inward anger of a man
against his brother, if it be without just cause, is homicide. You have
heard, saith he, the Law of Moses, _Thou shalt not kill_, and that
_Whosoever shall kill, shall be condemned before the judges_, or before
the session of the Seventy: but I say unto you, to be angry with one’s
brother without cause, or to say unto him _Raca_, or _Fool_, is
homicide, and shall be punished at the day of judgment, and session of
Christ, and his apostles, with hell fire. So that those words were not
used to distinguish between divers crimes, and divers courts of justice,
and divers punishments; but to tax the distinction between sin and sin,
which the Jews drew not from the difference of the will in obeying God,
but from the difference of their temporal courts of justice; and to show
them that he that had the will to hurt his brother, though the effect
appear but in reviling, or not at all, shall be cast into hell fire, by
the judges, and by the session, which shall be the same, not different,
courts at the day of judgment. This considered, what can be drawn from
this text, to maintain purgatory, I cannot imagine.

The sixth place is _Luke_ xvi. 9: _Make ye friends of the unrighteous
Mammon; that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
tabernacles_. This he alleges to prove invocation of saints departed.
But the sense is plain, that we should make friends with our riches, of
the poor; and thereby obtain their prayers whilst they live. _He that
giveth to the poor, lendeth to the Lord._

The seventh is _Luke_ xxiii. 42: _Lord, remember me, when thou comest
into thy kingdom_. Therefore, saith he, there is remission of sins after
this life. But the consequence is not good. Our Saviour then forgave
him; and at his coming again in glory, will remember to raise him again
to life eternal.

The eighth is _Acts_ ii. 24, where St. Peter saith of Christ, _that God
had raised him up, and loosed the pains of death, because it was not
possible he should be holden of it_: which he interprets to be a descent
of Christ into purgatory, to loose some souls there from their torments:
whereas it is manifest, that it was Christ that was loosed; it was he
that could not be holden of death, or the grave; and not the souls in
purgatory. But if that which Beza says, in his notes on this place, be
well observed, there is none that will not see, that instead of _pains_,
it should be _bands_; and then there is no further cause to seek for
purgatory in this text.


                                -------


                              CHAPTER XLV.

                 OF DEMONOLOGY, AND OTHER RELICS OF THE
                       RELIGION OF THE GENTILES.


[Sidenote: The original of demonology.]

The impression made on the organs of sight by lucid bodies, either in
one direct line, or in many lines, reflected from opaque, or refracted
in the passage through diaphanous bodies, produceth in living creatures,
in whom God hath placed such organs, an imagination of the object, from
whence the impression proceedeth; which imagination is called _sight_;
and seemeth not to be a mere imagination, but the body itself without
us; in the same manner, as when a man violently presseth his eye, there
appears to him a light without, and before him, which no man perceiveth
but himself; because there is indeed no such thing without him, but only
a motion in the interior organs, pressing by resistance outward, that
makes him think so. And the motion made by this pressure, continuing
after the object which caused it is removed, is that we call
_imagination_ and _memory_; and, in sleep, and sometimes in great
distemper of the organs by sickness or violence, a _dream_; of which
things I have already spoken briefly, in the second and third chapters.

This nature of sight having never been discovered by the ancient
pretenders to natural knowledge; much less by those that consider not
things so remote, as that knowledge is, from their present use; it was
hard for men to conceive of those images in the fancy and in the sense,
otherwise, than of things really without us: which some, because they
vanish away, they know not whither nor how, will have to be absolutely
incorporeal, that is to say immaterial, or forms without matter; colour
and figure, without any coloured or figured body; and that they can put
on airy bodies, as a garment, to make them visible when they will to our
bodily eyes; and others say, are bodies and living creatures, but made
of air, or other more subtle and ethereal matter, which is, then, when
they will be seen, condensed. But both of them agree on one general
appellation of them, DEMONS. As if the dead of whom they dreamed, were
not inhabitants of their own brain, but of the air, or of heaven, or
hell; not phantasms, but ghosts; with just as much reason as if one
should say, he saw his own ghost in a looking-glass, or the ghosts of
the stars in a river; or call the ordinary apparition of the sun, of the
quantity of about a foot, the _demon_, or ghost of that great sun that
enlighteneth the whole visible world: and by that means have feared
them, as things of an unknown, that is, of an unlimited power to do them
good or harm; and consequently, given occasion to the governors of the
heathen commonwealths to regulate this their fear, by establishing that
DEMONOLOGY, (in which the poets, as principal priests of the heathen
religion, were specially employed or reverenced,) to the public peace,
and to the obedience of subjects necessary thereunto; and to make some
of them good _demons_, and others evil; the one as a spur to the
observance, the other as reins to withhold them from violation of the
laws.

[Sidenote: What were the demons of the ancients.]

What kind of things they were, to whom they attributed the name of
_demons_, appeareth partly in the genealogy of their gods, written by
Hesiod, one of the most ancient poets of the Grecians; and partly in
other histories; of which I have observed some few before, in the
twelfth chapter of this discourse.

[Sidenote: How that doctrine was spread.]

The Grecians, by their colonies and conquests, communicated their
language and writings into Asia, Egypt, and Italy; and therein, by
necessary consequence their _demonology_, or, as St. Paul calls it, (_1
Tim._ iv. 1) _their doctrines of devils_. And by that means the
contagion was derived also to the Jews, both of Judea and Alexandria,
and other parts, whereinto they were dispersed. But the name of _demon_
they did not, as the Grecians, attribute to spirits both good and evil;
but to the evil only: and to the good _demons_ they gave the name of the
spirit of God; and esteemed those into whose bodies they entered to be
prophets. [Sidenote: How far received by the Jews.] In sum, all
singularity, if good, they attributed to the spirit of God; and if evil,
to some _demon_, but a κακοδάιμων, an evil _demon_, that is a _devil_.
And therefore, they called _demoniacs_, that is _possessed by the
devil_, such as we call madmen or lunatics; or such as had the falling
sickness, or that spoke any thing which they, for want of understanding,
thought absurd. As also of an unclean person in a notorious degree, they
used to say he had an unclean spirit; of a dumb man, that he had a dumb
devil; and of John the Baptist (_Matt._ xi. 18), for the singularity of
his fasting, that he had a devil; and of our Saviour, because he said,
he that keepeth his sayings should not see death _in æternum_, (_John_
viii. 52), _Now we know thou hast a devil; Abraham is dead, and the
prophets are dead_: and again, because he said (_John_ vii. 20), _They
went about to kill him_, the people answered, _Thou hast a devil; who
goeth about to kill thee?_ Whereby it is manifest, that the Jews had the
same opinions concerning phantasms, namely, that they were not
phantasms, that is, idols of the brain, but things real, and independant
on the fancy.

[Sidenote: Why our Saviour controlled it not.]

Which doctrine, if it be not true, why, may some say, did not our
Saviour contradict it, and teach the contrary? Nay, why does he use on
divers occasions such forms of speech as seem to confirm it? To this I
answer, that first, where Christ saith, (_Luke_ xxiv. 39) _A spirit hath
not flesh and bone_, though he show that there be spirits, yet he denies
not that they are bodies. And where St. Paul says, (_1 Cor._ xv. 44) _we
shall rise spiritual bodies_, he acknowledgeth the nature of spirits,
but that they are bodily spirits; which is not difficult to understand.
For air and many other things are bodies, though not flesh and bone, or
any other gross body to be discerned by the eye. But when our Saviour
speaketh to the devil, and commandeth him to go out of a man, if by the
devil, he meant a disease, as phrensy, or lunacy, or a corporeal spirit,
is not the speech improper? Can diseases hear? Or can there be a
corporeal spirit in a body of flesh and bone, full already of vital and
animal spirits? Are there not, therefore spirits, that neither have
bodies, nor are mere imaginations? To the first I answer, that the
addressing of our Saviour’s command to the madness, or lunacy he cureth,
is no more improper than was his rebuking of the fever, or of the wind
and sea; for neither do these hear; or than was the command of God, to
the light, to the firmament, to the sun, and stars, when he commanded
them to be; for they could not hear before they had a being. But those
speeches are not improper, because they signify the power of God’s word;
no more therefore is it improper, to command madness, or lunacy, under
the appellation of devils by which they were then commonly understood,
to depart out of a man’s body. To the second, concerning their being
incorporeal, I have not yet observed any place of Scripture, from whence
it can be gathered, that any man was ever possessed with any other
corporeal spirit, but that of his own, by which his body is naturally
moved.

[Sidenote: The Scriptures do not teach that spirits are incorporeal.]

Our Saviour, immediately after the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the
form of a dove, is said by St. Matthew (chapter iv. 1), to have been
_led up by the Spirit into the wilderness_; and the same is recited
(_Luke_ iv. 1) in these words, _Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, was
led in the Spirit into the wilderness_; whereby it is evident that by
_spirit_ there, is meant the Holy Ghost. This cannot be interpreted for
a possession; for Christ, and the Holy Ghost, are but one and the same
substance; which is no possession of one substance, or body, by another.
And whereas in the verses following he is said _to have been taken up by
the devil into the holy city, and set upon a pinnacle of the temple_,
shall we conclude thence that he was possessed of the devil, or carried
thither by violence? And again, _carried thence by the devil into an
exceeding high mountain, who showed him thence all the kingdoms of the
world_: wherein we are not to believe he was either possessed, or forced
by the devil; nor that any mountain is high enough, according to the
literal sense, to show him one whole hemisphere. What then can be the
meaning of this place, other than that he went of himself into the
wilderness; and that this carrying of him up and down from the
wilderness to the city, and from thence into a mountain, was a vision?
Conformable whereunto, is also the phrase of St. Luke, that he was led
into the wilderness, not _by_, but _in_, the Spirit; whereas, concerning
his being taken up into the mountain, and unto the pinnacle of the
temple, he speaketh as St. Matthew doth: which suiteth with the nature
of a vision.

Again, where St. Luke (chap. xxii. 3, 4) says of Judas Iscariot, that
_Satan entered into him, and thereupon that he went and communed with
the chief priests, and captains, how he might betray Christ unto them_;
it may be answered, that by the entering of Satan, that is the _enemy_,
into him, is meant, the hostile and traitorous intention of selling his
Lord and Master. For as by the Holy Ghost, is frequently in Scripture
understood, the graces and good inclinations given by the Holy Ghost; so
by the entering of Satan may be understood the wicked cogitations, and
designs of the adversaries of Christ, and his disciples. For as it is
hard to say, that the devil was entered into Judas, before he had any
such hostile design; so it is impertinent to say, he was first Christ’s
enemy in his heart, and that the devil entered into him afterwards.
Therefore the entering of Satan, and his wicked purpose, was one and the
same thing.

[Sidenote: The Scriptures do not teach that spirits are incorporeal.]

But if there be no immaterial spirit, or any possession of men’s bodies
by any spirit corporeal, it may again be asked, why our Saviour and his
apostles did not teach the people so; and in such clear words, as they
might no more doubt thereof. But such questions as these, are more
curious, than necessary for a Christian man’s salvation. Men may as well
ask why Christ, that could have given to all men faith, piety, and all
manner of moral virtues, gave it to some only, and not to all: and why
he left the search of natural causes, and sciences, to the natural
reason and industry of men, and did not reveal it to all, or any man
supernaturally; and many other such questions. Of which nevertheless
there may be alleged probable and pious reasons. For as God, when he
brought the Israelites into the land of Promise, did not secure them
therein, by subduing all the nations round about them; but left many of
them, as thorns in their sides, to awaken from time to time their piety
and industry: so our Saviour, in conducting us toward his heavenly
kingdom, did not destroy all the difficulties of natural questions; but
left them to exercise our industry, and reason; the scope of his
preaching, being only to show us this plain and direct way to salvation,
namely, the belief of this article, _that he was the Christ, the Son of
the living God, sent into the world to sacrifice himself for our sins,
and at his coming again, gloriously to reign over his elect, and to save
them from their enemies eternally_. To which, the opinion of possession
by spirits, or phantasms, is no impediment in the way; though it be to
some an occasion of going out of the way, and to follow their own
inventions. If we require of the Scripture an account of all questions,
which may be raised to trouble us in the performance of God’s commands,
we may as well complain of Moses for not having set down the time of the
creation of such spirits, as well as of the creation of the earth and
sea, and of men and beasts. To conclude; I find in Scripture that there
be angels, and spirits, good and evil; but not that they are
incorporeal, as are the apparitions men see in the dark, or in a dream,
or vision; which the Latins call _spectra_, and took for _demons_. And I
find that there are spirits corporeal, though subtle and invisible; but
not that any man’s body was possessed or inhabited by them; and that the
bodies of the saints shall be such, namely, spiritual bodies, as St.
Paul calls them.

[Sidenote: The power of casting out devils, not the same it was in the
           primitive church.]

Nevertheless, the contrary doctrine, namely, that there be incorporeal
spirits, hath hitherto so prevailed in the Church, that the use of
exorcism, that is to say, of ejection of devils by conjuration, is
thereupon built; and, though rarely and faintly practised, is not yet
totally given over. That there were many demoniacs in the primitive
Church, and few madmen, and other such singular diseases; whereas in
these times we hear of, and see many madmen, and few demoniacs, proceeds
not from the change of nature, but of names. But how it comes to pass
that whereas heretofore the apostles, and after them for a time, the
pastors of the Church, did cure those singular diseases, which now they
are not seen to do; as likewise, why it is not in the power of every
true believer now, to do all that the faithful did then, that is to say,
as we read (_Mark_ xvi. 17, 18), _in Christ’s name to cast out devils,
to speak with new tongues, to take up serpents, to drink deadly poison
without harm-taking, and to cure the sick by the laying on of their
hands_, and all this without other words, but _in the name of Jesus_, is
another question. And it is probable that those extraordinary gifts were
given to the Church, for no longer a time, than men trusted wholly to
Christ, and looked for their felicity only in his kingdom to come; and
consequently, that when they sought authority, and riches, and trusted
to their own subtlety for a kingdom of this world, these supernatural
gifts of God were again taken from them.

[Sidenote: Another relic of Gentilism, worshipping of images, left in
           the Church, not brought into it.]

Another relic of Gentilism is, the _worship of images_, neither
instituted by Moses in the Old, nor by Christ in the New Testament; nor
yet brought in from the Gentiles; but left amongst them after they had
given their names to Christ. Before our Saviour preached, it was the
general religion of the Gentiles to worship for gods those apparences
that remain in the brain from the impression of external bodies upon the
organs of their senses, which are commonly called _ideas_, _idols_,
_phantasms_, _conceits_, as being representations of those external
bodies which cause them, and have nothing in them of reality, no more
than there is in the things that seem to stand before us in a dream. And
this is the reason why St. Paul says, (1 Cor. viii. 4) _we know that an
idol is nothing_; not that he thought that an image of metal, stone, or
wood, was nothing; but that the thing which they honoured, or feared in
the image, and held for a god, was a mere figment, without place,
habitation, motion, or existence, but in the motions of the brain. And
the worship of these with divine honour, is that which is in the
Scripture called idolatry, and rebellion against God. For God being King
of the Jews, and his lieutenant being first Moses, and afterward the
high-priest; if the people had been permitted to worship, and pray to
images, which are representations of their own fancies, they had had no
further dependance on the true God, of whom there can be no similitude;
nor on his prime-ministers, Moses and the high-priests; but every man
had governed himself according to his own appetite, to the utter
eversion of the commonwealth, and their own destruction for want of
union. And therefore the first law of God was, _they should not take for
gods_, ALIENOS DEOS, that is, _the gods of other nations, but that only
true God, who vouchsafed to commune with Moses, and by him to give them
laws and directions, for their peace, and for their salvation from their
enemies_. And the second was, that _they should not make to themselves
any image to worship, of their own invention_. For it is the same
deposing of a king, to submit to another king, whether he be set up by a
neighbour nation, or by ourselves.

[Sidenote: Answer to certain seeming texts for images.]

The places of Scripture pretended to countenance the setting up of
images, to worship them; or to set them up at all in the places where
God is worshipped, are first, two examples; one of the cherubims over
the ark of God; the other of the brazen serpent. Secondly, some texts
whereby we are commanded to worship certain creatures for their relation
to God; as to worship his footstool. And lastly, some other texts, by
which is authorized a religious honouring of holy things. But before I
examine the force of those places, to prove that which is pretended, I
must first explain what is to be understood by _worshipping_, and what
by _images_ and _idols_.

[Sidenote: What is worship.]

I have already shown in the XXTH chapter of this discourse, that to
honour, is to value highly the power of any person: and that such value
is measured, by our comparing him with others. But because there is
nothing to be compared with God in power; we honour him not, but
dishonour him by any value less than infinite. And thus honour is
properly of its own nature, secret, and internal in the heart. But the
inward thoughts of men, which appear outwardly in their words and
actions, are the signs of our honouring, and these go by the name of
_worship_; in Latin, _cultus_. Therefore, to pray to, to swear by, to
obey, to be diligent and officious in serving: in sum, all words and
actions that betoken fear to offend, or desire to please, is _worship_,
whether those words and actions be sincere, or feigned: and because they
appear as signs of honouring, are ordinarily also called _honour_.

[Sidenote: Distinction between divine and civil worship.]

The worship we exhibit to those we esteem to be but men, as to kings,
and men in authority, is _civil worship_: but the worship we exhibit to
that which we think to be God, whatsoever the words, ceremonies,
gestures or other actions be, is _divine worship_. To fall prostrate
before a king, in him that thinks him but a man, is but civil worship:
and he that putteth off his hat in the church, for this cause, that he
thinketh it the house of God, worshippeth with divine worship. They that
seek the distinction of divine and civil worship, not in the intention
of the worshipper, but in the words δουλεία and λατρεία, deceive
themselves. For whereas there be two sorts of servants: that sort, which
is of those that are absolutely in the power of their masters, as slaves
taken in war, and their issue, whose bodies are not in their own power,
(their lives depending on the will of their masters, in such manner as
to forfeit them upon the least disobedience), and that are bought and
sold as beasts, were called δουλοι, that is, properly slaves, and their
service δουλεία: the other, which is of those that serve (for hire, or
in hope of benefit from their masters) voluntarily, are called θῆτες;
that is, domestic servants, to whose service the masters have no further
right, than is contained in the covenants made betwixt them. These two
kinds of servants have thus much common to them both, that their labour
is appointed them by another: and the word λάτρις, is the general name
of both, signifying him that worketh for another, whether as a slave, or
a voluntary servant. So that λατρεία signifieth generally all service;
but δουλεία the service of bondmen only, and the condition of slavery:
and both are used in Scripture, (to signify our service of God)
promiscuously; δουλεία, because we are God’s slaves; λατρεία, because we
serve him. And in all kinds of service is contained, not only obedience,
but also worship; that is, such actions, gestures, and words, as signify
_honour_.

[Sidenote: An image, what.]

An _image_, in the most strict signification of the word, is the
resemblance of something visible: [Sidenote: Phantasms.] in which sense
the phantastical forms, apparitions, or seemings of visible bodies to
the sight, are only _images_; such as are the show of a man, or other
thing in the water, by reflection, or refraction; or of the sun, or
stars by direct vision in the air; which are nothing real in the things
seen, nor in the place where they seem to be; nor are their magnitudes
and figures the same with that of the object; but changeable, by the
variation of the organs of sight, or by glasses, and are present
oftentimes in our imagination, and in our dreams, when the object is
absent; or changed into other colours and shapes, as things that depend
only upon the fancy. And these are the _images_, which are originally
and most properly called _ideas_, and _idols_, and derived from the
language of the _Grecians_, with whom the word εἴδω signifieth _to see_.
They also are called _phantasms_, which is in the same language,
_apparitions_. And from these images it is, that one of the faculties of
man’s nature, is called the _imagination_. And from hence it is
manifest, that there neither is, nor can be, any image made of a thing
invisible.

It is also evident, that there can be, no image of a thing infinite: for
all the images, and phantasms that are made by the impression of things
visible, are figured; but figure is a quantity every way determined. And
therefore there can be no image of God; nor of the soul of man; nor of
spirits; but only of bodies visible; that is, bodies that have light in
themselves, or are by such enlightened.

[Sidenote: Fictions.]

And whereas a man can fancy shapes he never saw; making up a figure out
of the parts of divers creatures; as the poets make their centaurs,
chimeras, and other monsters never seen: so can he also give matter to
those shapes, and make them in wood, clay, or metal. [Sidenote: Material
images.] And these are also called images, not for the resemblance of
any corporeal thing, but for the resemblance of some phantastical
inhabitants of the brain of the maker. But in these idols, as they are
originally in the brain, and as they are painted, carved, moulded, or
moulten in matter, there is a similitude of the one to the other, for
which the material body made by art, may be said to be the image of the
fantastical idol made by nature.

But in a larger use of the word image, is contained also, any
representation of one thing by another. So an earthly sovereign may be
called the image of God: and an inferior magistrate, the image of an
earthly sovereign. And many times in the idolatry of the Gentiles there
was little regard to the similitude of their material idol to the idol
in their fancy, and yet it was called the image of it. For a stone
unhewn has been set up for Neptune, and divers other shapes far
different from the shapes they conceived of their gods. And at this day
we see many images of the Virgin Mary, and other saints, unlike one
another, and without correspondence to any one man’s fancy; and yet
serve well enough for the purpose they were erected for; which was no
more but by the names only, to represent the persons mentioned in the
history; to which every man applieth a mental image of his own making,
or none at all. And thus an image in the largest sense, is either the
resemblance, or the representation of some thing visible; or both
together, as it happeneth for the most part.

But the name of idol is extended yet further in Scripture, to signify
also the sun, or a star, or any other creature, visible or invisible,
when they are worshipped for gods.

[Sidenote: Idolatry, what.]

Having shown what is _worship_, and what an _image_; I will now put them
together, and examine what that IDOLATRY is, which is forbidden in the
second commandment, and other places of the Scripture.

To worship an image, is voluntarily to do those external acts, which are
signs of honouring either the matter of the image, which is wood, stone,
metal, or some other visible creature; or the phantasm of the brain, for
the resemblance, or representation whereof, the matter was formed and
figured; or both together, as one animate body, composed of the matter
and the phantasm, as of a body and soul.

To be uncovered, before a man of power and authority, or before the
throne of a prince, or in such other places as he ordaineth to that
purpose in his absence, is to worship that man, or prince with civil
worship; as being a sign, not of honouring the stool or place, but the
person; and is not idolatry. But if he that doth it, should suppose the
soul of the prince to be in the stool, or should present a petition to
the stool, it were divine worship, and idolatry.

To pray to a king for such things, as he is able to do for us, though we
prostrate ourselves before him, is but civil worship; because we
acknowledge no other power in him, but human: but voluntarily to pray
unto him for fair weather, or for any thing which God only can do for
us, is divine worship, and idolatry. On the other side, if a king compel
a man to it by the terror of death, or other great corporal punishment,
it is not idolatry: for the worship which the sovereign commandeth to be
done unto himself by the terror of his laws, is not a sign that he that
obeyeth him, does inwardly honour him as a God, but that he is desirous
to save himself from death, or from a miserable life; and that which is
not a sign of internal honour, is no worship; and therefore no idolatry.
Neither can it be said, that he that does it, scandalizeth, or layeth
any stumbling block before his brother; because how wise, or learned
soever he be that worshippeth in that manner, another man cannot from
thence argue, that he approveth it; but that he doth it for fear; and
that it is not his act, but the act of his sovereign.

To worship God, in some peculiar place, or turning a man’s face towards
an image, or determinate place, is not to worship, or honour the place,
or image; but to acknowledge it holy, that is to say, to acknowledge the
image, or the place to be set apart from common use. For that is the
meaning of the word _holy_; which implies no new quality in the place or
image, but only a new relation by appropriation to God; and therefore is
not idolatry; no more than it was idolatry to worship God before the
brazen serpent; or for the Jews, when they were out of their own
country, to turn their faces, when they prayed, towards the temple of
Jerusalem; or for Moses to put off his shoes when he was before the
flaming bush, the ground appertaining to Mount Sinai, which place God
had chosen to appear in, and to give his laws to the people of Israel,
and was therefore holy ground, not by inherent sanctity, but by
separation to God’s use; or for Christians to worship in the churches,
which are once solemnly dedicated to God for that purpose, by the
authority of the king, or other true representant of the Church. But to
worship God, as inanimating, or inhabiting such image, or place; that is
to say, in infinite substance in a finite place, is idolatry: for such
finite gods, are but idols of the brain, nothing real; and are commonly
called in the Scripture by the names of _vanity_, and _lies_, and
_nothing_. Also to worship God, not as inanimating, or present in the
place, or image; but to the end to be put in mind of him, or of some
works of his, in case the place, or image be dedicated, or set up by
private authority, and not by the authority of them that are our
sovereign pastors, is idolatry. For the commandment is, _thou shalt not
make to thyself any graven image_. God commanded Moses to set up the
brazen serpent; he did not make it to himself; it was not therefore
against the commandment. But the making of the golden calf by Aaron, and
the people, as being done without authority from God, was idolatry; not
only because they held it for God, but also because they made it for a
religious use, without warrant either from God their sovereign, or from
Moses, that was his lieutenant.

The Gentiles worshipped for gods, Jupiter and others; that living, were
men perhaps that had done great and glorious acts: and for the children
of God, divers men and women, supposing them gotten between an immortal
deity, and a mortal man. This was idolatry, because they made them so to
themselves, having no authority from God, neither in his eternal law of
reason, nor in his positive and revealed will. But though our Saviour
was a man, whom we also believe to be God immortal, and the Son of God,
yet this is no idolatry; because we build not that belief upon our own
fancy, or judgment, but upon the Word of God revealed in the Scriptures.
And for the adoration of the Eucharist, if the words of Christ, _this is
my body_, signify, _that he himself, and the seeming bread in his hand,
and not only so, but that all the seeming morsels of bread that have
ever since been, and any time hereafter shall be consecrated by priests,
be so many Christ’s bodies, and yet all of them but one body_; then is
that no idolatry, because it is authorized by our Saviour: but if that
text do not signify that, (for there is no other that can be alleged for
it) then, because it is a worship of human institution, it is idolatry.
For it is not enough to say, God can transubstantiate the bread into
Christ’s body: for the Gentiles also held God to be omnipotent, and
might upon that ground no less excuse their idolatry, by pretending, as
well as others, a transubstantiation of their wood, and stone into God
Almighty.

Whereas there be, that pretend divine inspiration to be the supernatural
entering of the Holy Ghost into a man, and not an acquisition of God’s
graces, by doctrine, and study; I think they are in a very dangerous
dilemma. For if they worship not the man whom they believe to be so
inspired, they fall into impiety; as not adoring God’s supernatural
presence. And again, if they worship him, they commit idolatry; for the
apostles would never permit themselves to be so worshipped. Therefore
the safest way is to believe, that by the descending of the dove upon
the apostles; and by Christ’s breathing on them, when he gave them the
Holy Ghost; and by the giving of it by imposition of hands, are
understood the signs which God has been pleased to use, or ordain to be
used, of his promise to assist those persons in their study to preach
his kingdom, and in their conversation, that it might not be scandalous,
but edifying to others.

[Sidenote: Scandalous worship of images.]

Besides the idolatrous worship of images, there is also a scandalous
worship of them; which is also a sin, but not idolatry. For _idolatry_
is to worship by signs of an internal, and real honour: but _scandalous
worship_, is but seeming worship, and may sometimes be joined with an
inward, and hearty detestation, both of the image, and of the
phantastical _demon_, or idol, to which it is dedicated; and proceed
only from the fear of death, or other grievous punishment; and is
nevertheless a sin in them that so worship, in case they be men whose
actions are looked at by others, as lights to guide them by; because
following their ways, they cannot but stumble, and fall in the way of
religion: whereas the example of those we regard not, works not on us at
all, but leaves us to our own diligence and caution; and consequently
are no causes of our falling.

If therefore a pastor lawfully called to teach and direct others, or any
other, of whose knowledge there is a great opinion, do external honour
to an idol for fear; unless he make his fear and unwillingness to it, as
evident as the worship; he scandalizeth his brother, by seeming to
approve idolatry. For his brother arguing from the action of his
teacher, or of him whose knowledge he esteemeth great, concludes it to
be lawful in itself. And this scandal is sin, and a _scandal given_. But
if one being no pastor, nor of eminent reputation for knowledge in
Christian doctrine, do the same, and another follow him; this is no
scandal given; for he had no cause to follow such example: but is a
pretence of scandal, which he taketh of himself for an excuse before
men. For an unlearned man, that is in the power of an idolatrous king,
or state, if commanded on pain of death to worship before an idol, he
detesteth the idol in his heart, he doth well; though if he had the
fortitude to suffer death, rather than worship it, he should do better.
But if a pastor, who as Christ’s messenger, has undertaken to teach
Christ’s doctrine to all nations, should do the same, it were not only a
sinful scandal, in respect of other Christian men’s consciences, but a
perfidious forsaking of his charge.

The sum of that which I have said hitherto, concerning the worship of
images, is this, that he that worshippeth in an image, or any creature,
either the matter thereof, or any fancy of his own, which he thinketh to
dwell in it; or both together; or believeth that such things hear his
prayers, or see his devotions, without ears or eyes, committeth
idolatry: and he that counterfeiteth such worship for fear of
punishment, if he be a man whose example hath power amongst his
brethren, committeth a sin. But he that worshippeth the Creator of the
world before such an image, or in such a place as he hath not made, or
chosen of himself, but taken from the commandment of God’s word, as the
Jews did in worshipping God before the cherubims, and before the brazen
serpent for a time, and in, or towards the Temple of Jerusalem, which
was also but for a time, committeth not idolatry.

Now for the worship of saints, and images, and relics, and other things
at this day practised in the Church of Rome, I say they are not allowed
by the Word of God, nor brought into the Church of Rome, from the
doctrine there taught; but partly left in it at the first conversion of
the Gentiles; and afterwards countenanced, and confirmed, and augmented
by the bishops of Rome.

[Sidenote: Answer to the argument from the cherubims, and brazen
           serpent.]

As for the proofs alleged out of Scripture, namely, those examples of
images appointed by God to be set up; they were not set up for the
people, or any man to worship, but that they should worship God himself
before them; as before the cherubims over the ark, and the brazen
serpent. For we read not, that the priest, or any other did worship the
cherubims; but contrarily we read (_2 Kings_ xviii. 4) that Hezekiah
brake in pieces the brazen serpent which Moses had set up, because the
people burnt incense to it. Besides, those examples are not put for our
imitation, that we also should set up images, under pretence of
worshipping God before them; because the words of the second
commandment, _thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image, &c._
distinguish between the images that God commanded to be set up, and
those which we set up to ourselves. And therefore from the cherubims or
brazen serpent, to the images of man’s devising; and from the worship
commanded by God, to the will-worship of men, the argument is not good.
This also is to be considered, that as Hezekiah brake in pieces the
brazen serpent, because the Jews did worship it, to the end they should
do so no more; so also Christian sovereigns ought to break down the
images which their subjects have been accustomed to worship, that there
be no more occasion of such idolatry. For at this day, the ignorant
people, where images are worshipped, do really believe there is a divine
power in the images; and are told by their pastors, that some of them
have spoken; and have bled; and that miracles have been done by them;
which they apprehend as done by the saint, which they think either is
the image itself, or in it. The Israelites, when they worshipped the
calf, did think they worshipped the God that brought them out of Egypt;
and yet it was idolatry, because they thought the calf either was that
God, or had him in his belly. And though some man may think it
impossible for people to be so stupid, as to think the image to be God,
or a saint; or to worship it in that notion; yet it is manifest in
Scripture to the contrary; where when the golden calf was made, the
people said, (_Exod._ xxxii. 4) _These are thy gods, O Israel_; and
where the images of Laban (_Gen._ xxxi. 30) are called his gods. And we
see daily by experience in all sorts of people, that such men as study
nothing but their food and ease, are content to believe any absurdity,
rather than to trouble themselves to examine it; holding their faith as
it were by entail unalienable, except by an express and new law.

[Sidenote: Painting of fancies no idolatry; but abusing them to
           religious worship is.]

But they infer from some other places, that it is lawful to paint
angels, and also God himself: as from God’s walking in the garden; from
Jacob’s seeing God at the top of the ladder; and from other visions, and
dreams. But visions, and dreams, whether natural, or supernatural, are
but phantasms: and he that painteth an image of any of them, maketh not
an image of God, but of his own phantasm, which is making of an idol. I
say not, that to draw a picture after a fancy, is a sin; but when it is
drawn, to hold it for a representation of God, is against the second
commandment; and can be of no use, but to worship. And the same may be
said of the images of angels, and of men dead; unless as monuments of
friends, or of men worthy remembrance. For such use of an image, is not
worship of the image; but a civil honouring of the person, not that is,
but that was. But when it is done to the image which we make of a saint,
for no other reason, but that we think he heareth our prayers, and is
pleased with the honour we do him, when dead, and without sense, we
attribute to him more than human power; and therefore it is idolatry.

Seeing therefore there is no authority, neither in the law of Moses, nor
in the Gospel, for the religious worship of images, or other
representations of God, which men set up to themselves; or for the
worship of the image of any creature in heaven or earth, or under the
earth: and whereas Christian kings, who are living representants of God,
are not to be worshipped by their subjects, by any act that signifieth a
greater esteem of his power, than the nature of mortal man is capable
of; it cannot be imagined, that the religious worship now in use, was
brought into the Church by misunderstanding of the Scripture. It resteth
therefore, that it was left in it, by not destroying the images
themselves, in the conversion of the Gentiles that worshipped them.

[Sidenote: How idolatry was left in the Church.]

The cause whereof, was the immoderate esteem, and prices set upon the
workmanship of them, which made the owners, though converted from
worshipping them as they had done religiously for demons, to retain them
still in their houses, upon pretence of doing it in the honour of
Christ, of the Virgin Mary, and of the Apostles, and other the pastors
of the primitive Church; as being easy, by giving them new names, to
make that an image of the Virgin Mary, and of her son our Saviour, which
before perhaps was called the image of Venus, and Cupid; and so of a
Jupiter to make a Barnabas, and of Mercury a Paul, and the like. And as
worldly ambition creeping by degrees into the pastors, drew them to an
endeavour of pleasing the new-made Christians; and also to a liking of
this kind of honour, which they also might hope for after their decease,
as well as those that had already gained it: so the worshipping of the
images of Christ and his apostles, grew more and more idolatrous; save
that somewhat after the time of Constantine, divers emperors, and
bishops, and general councils, observed and opposed the unlawfulness
thereof; but too late, or too weakly.

[Sidenote: Canonizing of saints.]

The canonizing of saints, is another relic of Gentilism: it is neither a
misunderstanding of Scripture, nor a new invention of the Roman Church,
but a custom as ancient as the commonwealth of Rome itself. The first
that ever was canonized at Rome, was Romulus, and that upon the
narration of Julius Proculus, that swore before the senate, he spake
with him after his death, and was assured by him, he dwelt in heaven,
and was there called _Quirinus_, and would be propitious to the state of
their new city: and thereupon the senate gave _public testimony_ of his
sanctity. Julius Cæsar, and other emperors after him, had the like
_testimony_; that is, were canonized for saints; for by such testimony
is CANONIZATION now defined; and is the same with the ἀποθέωσις of the
heathen.

[Sidenote: The name of Pontifex.]

It is also from the Roman Heathen, that the Popes have received the
name, and power of PONTIFEX MAXIMUS. This was the name of him that in
the ancient commonwealth of Rome, had the supreme authority under the
senate and people, of regulating all ceremonies and doctrines concerning
their religion: and when Augustus Cæsar changed the state into a
monarchy, he took to himself no more but this office, and that of
tribune of the people, that is to say, the supreme power both in state,
and religion; and the succeeding emperors enjoyed the same. But when the
emperor Constantine lived, who was the first that professed and
authorized Christian religion, it was consonant to his profession, to
cause religion to be regulated, under his authority, by the Bishop of
Rome: though it do not appear they had so soon the name of Pontifex; but
rather, that the succeeding bishops took it of themselves, to
countenance the power they exercised over the bishops of the Roman
provinces. For it is not any privilege of St. Peter, but the privilege
of the city of Rome, which the emperors were always willing to uphold,
that gave them such authority over other bishops; as may be evidently
seen by that, that the bishop of Constantinople, when the emperor made
that city the seat of the empire, pretended to be equal to the bishop of
Rome; though at last, not without contention, the Pope carried it, and
became the _Pontifex Maximus_; but in right only of the emperor; and not
without the bounds of the empire; nor any where, after the emperor had
lost his power in Rome; though it were the Pope himself that took his
power from him. From whence we may by the way observe, that there is no
place for the superiority of the Pope over other bishops, except in the
territories whereof he is himself the civil sovereign, and where the
emperor having sovereign power civil, hath expressly chosen the Pope for
the chief pastor under himself, of his Christian subjects.

[Sidenote: Procession of images.]

The carrying about of images in _procession_, is another relic of the
religion of the Greeks, and Romans. For they also carried their idols
from place to place, in a kind of chariot, which was peculiarly
dedicated to that use, which the Latins called _thensa_, and _vehiculum
Deorum_; and the image was placed in a frame, or shrine, which they
called _ferculum_: and that which they called _pompa_, is the same that
now is named _procession_. According whereunto, amongst the divine
honours which were given to Julius Cæsar by the senate, this was one,
that in the pomp, or procession, at the Circæan games, he should have
_thensam et ferculum_, a sacred chariot and a shrine; which was as much,
as to be carried up and down as a god: just as at this day the Popes are
carried by Switzers under a canopy.

[Sidenote: Wax candles, and torches lighted.]

To these processions also belonged the bearing of burning torches, and
candles, before the images of the gods, both amongst the Greeks, and
Romans. For afterwards the emperors of Rome received the same honour; as
we read of Caligula, that at his reception to the empire, he was carried
from Misenum to Rome, in the midst of a throng of people, the ways beset
with altars, and beasts for sacrifice, and burning _torches_: and of
Caracalla, that was received into Alexandria with incense, and with
casting of flowers, and δαδοῦχίαις, that is, with torches; for δαδοῦχοι
were they that amongst the Greeks carried torches lighted in the
processions of their gods. And in process of time, the devout, but
ignorant people, did many times honour their bishops with the like pomp
of wax candles, and the images of our Saviour, and the saints,
constantly, in the church itself. And thus came in the use of wax
candles; and was also established by some of the ancient Councils.

The heathens had also their _aqua lustralis_, that is to say, _holy
water_. The Church of Rome imitates them also in their _holy days_. They
had their _bacchanalia_; and we have our _wakes_, answering to them:
they their _saturnalia_, and we our _carnivals_, and Shrove-Tuesday’s
liberty of servants: they their procession of _Priapus_; we our fetching
in, erection, and dancing about _May-poles_; and dancing is one kind of
worship: they had their procession called _Ambarvalia_; and we our
procession about the fields in the _Rogation-week_. Nor do I think that
these are all the ceremonies that have been left in the Church, from the
first conversion of the Gentiles; but they are all that I can for the
present call to mind; and if a man would well observe that which is
delivered in the histories, concerning the religious rites of the Greeks
and Romans, I doubt not but he might find many more of these old empty
bottles of Gentilism, which the doctors of the Roman Church, either by
negligence or ambition, have filled up again with the new wine of
Christianity, that will not fail in time to break them.


                                -------


                              CHAP. XLVI.

                 OF DARKNESS FROM VAIN PHILOSOPHY, AND
                          FABULOUS TRADITIONS.


[Sidenote: What philosophy is.]

By PHILOSOPHY is understood _the knowledge acquired by reasoning, from
the manner of the generation of any thing, to the properties: or from
the properties, to some possible way of generation of the same; to the
end to be able to produce, as far as matter, and human force permit,
such effects, as human life requireth_. So the geometrician, from the
construction of figures, findeth out many properties thereof; and from
the properties, new ways of their construction, by reasoning; to the end
to be able to measure land, and water; and for infinite other uses. So
the astronomer, from the rising, setting, and moving of the sun, and
stars, in divers parts of the heavens, findeth out the causes of day,
and night, and of the different seasons of the year; whereby he keepeth
an account of time; and the like of other sciences.

[Sidenote: Prudence no part of philosophy.]

By which definition it is evident, that we are not to account as any
part thereof, that original knowledge called experience, in which
consisteth prudence; because it is not attained by reasoning, but found
as well in brute beasts, as in man; and is but a memory of successions
of events in times past, wherein the omission of every little
circumstance altering the effect, frustrateth the expectation of the
most prudent: whereas nothing is produced by reasoning aright, but
general, eternal, and immutable truth.

[Sidenote: No false doctrine is part of philosophy.]

Nor are we therefore to give that name to any false conclusions: for he
that reasoneth aright in words he understandeth, can never conclude an
error:

[Sidenote: No more is revelation supernatural.]

Nor to that which any man knows by supernatural revelation; because it
is not acquired by reasoning:

[Sidenote: Nor learning taken upon credit of authors.]

Nor that which is gotten by reasoning from the authority of books;
because it is not by reasoning from the cause to the effect, nor from
the effect to the cause; and is not knowledge but faith.

[Sidenote: Of the beginnings and progress of philosophy.]

The faculty of reasoning being consequent to the use of speech, it was
not possible, but that there should have been some general truths found
out by reasoning, as ancient almost as language itself. The savages of
America, are not without some good moral sentences; also they have a
little arithmetic, to add, and divide in numbers not too great: but they
are not, therefore, philosophers. For as there were plants of corn and
wine in small quantity dispersed in the fields and woods, before men
knew their virtue, or made use of them for their nourishment, or planted
them apart in fields and vineyards; in which time they fed on acorns,
and drank water: so also there have been divers true, general, and
profitable speculations from the beginning; as being the natural plants
of human reason. But they were at first but few in number; men lived
upon gross experience; there was no method; that is to say, no sowing,
nor planting of knowledge by itself, apart from the weeds, and common
plants of error and conjecture. And the cause of it being the want of
leisure from procuring the necessities of life, and defending themselves
against their neighbours, it was impossible, till the erecting of great
commonwealths, it should be otherwise. _Leisure_ is the mother of
_philosophy_; and _Commonwealth_, the mother of _peace_ and _leisure_.
Where first were great and flourishing _cities_, there was first the
study of _philosophy_. The _Gymnosophists_ of India, the _Magi_ of
Persia, and the _Priests_ of Chaldea and Egypt, are counted the most
ancient philosophers; and those countries were the most ancient of
kingdoms. _Philosophy_ was not risen to the Grecians, and other people
of the west, whose _commonwealths_, no greater perhaps than Lucca or
Geneva, had never _peace_, but when their fears of one another were
equal; nor the _leisure_ to observe anything but one another. At length,
when war had united many of these Grecian lesser cities, into fewer, and
greater; then began _seven men_, of several parts of Greece, to get the
reputation of being _wise_; some of them for _moral_ and _politic_
sentences; and others for the learning of the Chaldeans and Egyptians,
which was _astronomy_, and _geometry_. But we hear not yet of any
_schools_ of _philosophy_.

[Sidenote: Of the schools of philosophy amongst the Athenians.]

After the Athenians, by the overthrow of the Persian armies, had gotten
the dominion of the sea; and thereby, of all the islands, and maritime
cities of the Archipelago, as well of Asia as Europe; and were grown
wealthy; they that had no employment, neither at home nor abroad, had
little else to employ themselves in, but either (as St. Luke says,
_Acts_ xvii. 21), _in telling and hearing news_, or in discoursing of
_philosophy_ publicly to the youth of the city. Every master took some
place for that purpose. Plato, in certain public walks called
_Academia_, from one _Academus_: Aristotle in the walk of the temple of
Pan, called _Lyceum_: others in the _Stoa_, or covered walk, wherein the
merchants’ goods were brought to land: others in other places; where
they spent the time of their leisure, in teaching or in disputing of
their opinions: and some in any place, where they could get the youth of
the city together to hear them talk. And this was it which Carneades
also did at Rome, when he was ambassador: which caused Cato to advise
the senate to dispatch him quickly, for fear of corrupting the manners
of the young men, that delighted to hear him speak, as they thought,
fine things.

From this it was, that the place where any of them taught, and disputed,
was called _schola_, which in their tongue signifieth _leisure_; and
their disputations, _diatribæ_, that is to say, _passing of the time_.
Also the philosophers themselves had the name of their sects, some of
them from these their Schools: for they that followed Plato’s doctrine,
were called _Academics_; the followers of Aristotle _Peripatetics_, from
the walk he taught in; and those that Zeno taught _Stoics_, from the
_Stoa_; as if we should denominate men from _Moor-fields_, from _Paul’s
Church_, and from the _Exchange_, because they meet there often, to
prate and loiter.

Nevertheless, men were so much taken with this custom, that in time it
spread itself over all Europe, and the best part of Afric; so as there
were schools publicly erected and maintained, for lectures and
disputations, almost in every commonwealth.

[Sidenote: Of the schools of the Jews.]

There were also schools, anciently, both before and after the time of
our Saviour, amongst the Jews; but they were schools of their law. For
though they were called _synagogues_, that is to say, congregations of
the people; yet, inasmuch as the law was every sabbath-day read,
expounded, and disputed in them, they differed not in nature, but in
name only, from public schools; and were not only in Jerusalem, but in
every city of the Gentiles, where the Jews inhabited. There was such a
school at Damascus, whereinto Paul entered, to persecute. There were
others at Antioch, Iconium, and Thessalonica, whereinto he entered to
dispute: and such was the synagogue of the _Libertines_, _Cyrenians_,
_Alexandrians_, _Cilicians_, and those of Asia; that is to say, the
school of _Libertines_, and of _Jews_ that were strangers in Jerusalem;
and of this school they were that disputed (_Acts_ vi. 9) with St.
Stephen.

[Sidenote: The schools of the Grecians unprofitable.]

But what has been the utility of those schools? What science is there at
this day acquired by their readings and disputings? That we have of
geometry, which is the mother of all natural science, we are not
indebted for it to the schools. Plato, that was the best philosopher of
the Greeks, forbad entrance into his school to all that were not already
in some measure geometricians. There were many that studied that science
to the great advantage of mankind: but there is no mention of their
schools; nor was there any sect of geometricians; nor did they then pass
under the name of philosophers. The natural philosophy of those schools
was rather a dream than science, and set forth in senseless and
insignificant language; which cannot be avoided by those that will teach
philosophy, without having first attained great knowledge in geometry.
For nature worketh by motion; the ways and degrees whereof cannot be
known, without the knowledge of the proportions and properties of lines
and figures. Their moral philosophy is but a description of their own
passions. For the rule of manners, without civil government, is the law
of nature; and in it, the law civil, that determineth what is _honest_
and _dishonest_, what is _just_ and _unjust_, and generally what is
_good_ and _evil_. Whereas they make the rules of _good_ and _bad_, by
their own _liking_ and _disliking_: by which means, in so great
diversity of taste, there is nothing generally agreed on; but every one
doth, as far as he dares, whatsoever seemeth good in his own eyes, to
the subversion of commonwealth. Their _logic_, which should be the
method of reasoning, is nothing else but captions of words, and
inventions how to puzzle such as should go about to pose them. To
conclude, there is nothing so absurd, that the old philosophers, as
Cicero saith, (who was one of them,) have not some of them maintained.
And I believe that scarce anything can be more absurdly said in natural
philosophy, than that which now is called _Aristotle’s Metaphysics_; nor
more repugnant to government, than much of that he hath said in his
_Politics_; nor more ignorantly, than a great part of his _Ethics_.

[Sidenote: The schools of the Jews unprofitable.]

The school of the Jews was originally a school of the law of Moses; who
commanded (_Deut._ xxxi. 10) that at the end of every seventh year, at
the Feast of the Tabernacles, it should be read to all the people, that
they might hear and learn it. Therefore the reading of the law, which
was in use after the captivity, every Sabbath day, ought to have had no
other end, but the acquainting of the people with the Commandments which
they were to obey, and to expound unto them the writings of the
prophets. But it is manifest, by the many reprehensions of them by our
Saviour, that they corrupted the text of the law with their false
commentaries, and vain traditions; and so little understood the
prophets, that they did neither acknowledge Christ, nor the works he
did, of which the prophets prophesied. So that by their lectures and
disputations in their synagogues, they turned the doctrine of their law
into a fantastical kind of philosophy, concerning the incomprehensible
nature of God, and of spirits; which they compounded of the vain
philosophy and theology of the Grecians, mingled with their own fancies,
drawn from the obscurer places of the Scripture, and which might most
easily be wrested to their purpose; and from the fabulous traditions of
their ancestors.

[Sidenote: University, what it is.]

That which is now called an _University_, is a joining together, and an
incorporation under one government, of many public schools, in one and
the same town or city. In which, the principal schools were ordained for
the three professions, that is to say, of the Roman religion, of the
Roman law, and of the art of medicine. And for the study of philosophy,
it hath no otherwise place, than as a hand-maid to the Roman religion:
and since the authority of Aristotle is only current there, that study
is not properly philosophy, (the nature whereof dependeth not on
authors,) but _Aristotelity_. And for geometry, till of very late times
it had no place at all; as being subservient to nothing but rigid truth.
And if any man by the ingenuity of his own nature, had attained to any
degree of perfection therein, he was commonly thought a magician, and
his art diabolical.

[Sidenote: Errors brought into religion from Aristotle’s metaphysics.]

Now to descend to the particular tenets of vain philosophy, derived to
the Universities, and thence into the Church, partly from Aristotle,
partly from blindness of understanding; I shall first consider their
principles. There is a certain _philosophia prima_, on which all other
philosophy ought to depend; and consisteth principally, in right
limiting of the significations of such appellations, or names, as are of
all others the most universal; which limitations serve to avoid
ambiguity and equivocation in reasoning; and are commonly called
definitions; such as are the definitions of body, time, place, matter,
form, essence, subject, substance, accident, power, act, finite,
infinite, quantity, quality, motion, action, passion, and divers others,
necessary to the explaining of a man’s conceptions concerning the nature
and generation of bodies. The explication, that is, the settling of the
meaning, of which, and the like terms, is commonly in the Schools called
_metaphysics_; as being a part of the philosophy of Aristotle, which
hath that for title. But it is in another sense; for there it signifieth
as much as _books written or placed after his natural philosophy_: but
the schools take them for _books of supernatural philosophy_: for the
word _metaphysics_ will bear both these senses. And indeed that which is
there written, is for the most part so far from the possibility of being
understood, and so repugnant to natural reason, that whosoever thinketh
there is any thing to be understood by it, must needs think it
supernatural.

[Sidenote: Errors concerning abstract essences.]

From these metaphysics, which are mingled with the Scripture to make
school divinity, we are told, there be in the world certain essences
separated from bodies, which they call _abstract essences, and
substantial forms_. For the interpreting of which jargon, there is need
of somewhat more than ordinary attention in this place. Also I ask
pardon of those that are not used to this kind of discourse, for
applying myself to those that are. The world, (I mean not the earth
only, that denominates the lovers of it _worldly men_, but the
_universe_, that is, the whole mass of all things that are), is
corporeal, that is to say, body; and hath the dimensions of magnitude,
namely, length, breadth, and depth: also every part of body, is likewise
body, and hath the like dimensions; and consequently every part of the
universe, is body, and that which is not body, is no part of the
universe: and because the universe is all, that which is no part of it,
is _nothing_; and consequently _no where_. Nor does it follow from
hence, that spirits are _nothing_: for they have dimensions, and are
therefore really _bodies_; though that name in common speech be given to
such bodies only, as are visible, or palpable; that is, that have some
degree of opacity. But for spirits, they call them incorporeal; which is
a name of more honour, and may therefore with more piety be attributed
to God himself; in whom we consider not what attribute expresseth best
his nature, which is incomprehensible; but what best expresseth our
desire to honour Him.

To know now upon what grounds they say there be _essences abstract_, or
_substantial forms_, we are to consider what those words do properly
signify. The use of words, is to register to ourselves, and make
manifest to others the thoughts and conceptions of our minds. Of which
words, some are the names of the things conceived; as the names of all
sorts of bodies, that work upon the senses, and leave an impression in
the imagination. Others are the names of the imaginations themselves;
that is to say, of those ideas, or mental images we have of all things
we see, or remember. And others again are names of names; or of
different sorts of speech: as _universal_, _plural_, _singular_, are the
names of names; and _definition_, _affirmation_, _negation_, _true_,
_false_, _syllogism_, _interrogation_, _promise_, _covenant_, are the
names of certain forms of speech. Others serve to show the consequence,
or repugnance of one name to another; as when one saith, _a man is a
body_, he intendeth that the name of _body_ is necessarily consequent to
the name of _man_; as being but several names of the same thing, _man_;
which consequence is signified by coupling them together with the word
_is_. And as we use the verb _is_, so the Latins use their verb _est_,
and the Greeks their Ἔστι through all its declinations. Whether all
other nations of the world have in their several languages a word that
answereth to it, or not, I cannot tell; but I am sure they have not need
of it. For the placing of two names in order may serve to signify their
consequence, if it were the custom, (for custom is it, that gives words
their force,) as well as the words _is_, or _be_, or _are_, and the
like.

And if it were so, that there were a language without any verb
answerable to _est_, or _is_, or _be_; yet the men that used it would be
not a jot the less capable of inferring, concluding, and of all kind of
reasoning, than were the Greeks, and Latins. But what then would become
of these terms, of _entity_, _essence_, _essential_, _essentiality_,
that are derived from it, and of many more than depend on these, applied
as most commonly they are? They are therefore no names of things; but
signs, by which we make known, that we conceive the consequence of one
name or attribute to another: as when we say, _a man is a living body_,
we mean not that the _man_ is one thing, the _living body_ another, and
the _is_, or _being_ a third; but that the _man_, and the _living body_,
is the same thing; because the consequence, _if he be a man, he is a
living body_, is a true consequence, signified by that word _is_.
Therefore, _to be a body_, _to walk_, _to be speaking_, _to live_, _to
see_, and the like infinitives; also _corporeity_, _walking_,
_speaking_, _life_, _sight_, and the like, that signify just the same,
are the names of _nothing_; as I have elsewhere more amply expressed.

But to what purpose, may some man say, is such subtlety in a work of
this nature, where I pretend to nothing but what is necessary to the
doctrine of government and obedience? It is to this purpose, that men
may no longer suffer themselves to be abused, by them, that by this
doctrine of _separated essences_, built on the vain philosophy of
Aristotle, would fright them from obeying the laws of their country,
with empty names; as men fright birds from the corn with an empty
doublet, a hat, and a crooked stick. For it is upon this ground, that
when a man is dead and buried, they say his soul, that is his life, can
walk separated from his body, and is seen by night amongst the graves.
Upon the same ground they say, that the figure, and colour, and taste of
a piece of bread, has a being, there, where they say there is no bread.
And upon the same ground they say, that faith, and wisdom, and other
virtues, are sometimes _poured_ into a man, sometimes _blown_ into him
from Heaven, as if the virtuous and their virtues could be asunder; and
a great many other things that serve to lessen the dependance of
subjects on the sovereign power of their country. For who will endeavour
to obey the laws, if he expect obedience to be poured or blown into him?
Or who will not obey a priest, that can make God, rather than his
sovereign, nay than God himself? Or who, that is in fear of ghosts, will
not bear great respect to those that can make the holy water, that
drives them from him? And this shall suffice for an example of the
errors, which are brought into the Church, from the _entities_ and
_essences_ of Aristotle: which it may be he knew to be false philosophy;
but writ it as a thing consonant to, and corroborative of their
religion; and fearing the fate of Socrates.

Being once fallen into this error of _separated essences_, they are
thereby necessarily involved in many other absurdities that follow it.
For seeing they will have these forms to be real, they are obliged to
assign them _some place_. But because they hold them incorporeal,
without all dimension of quantity, and all men know that place is
dimension, and not to be filled, but by that which is corporeal; they
are driven to uphold their credit with a distinction, that they are not
indeed anywhere _circumscriptivè_, but _definitivè_; which terms being
mere words, and in this occasion insignificant, pass only in Latin, that
the vanity of them may be concealed. For the circumscription of a thing,
is nothing else but the determination, or defining of its place; and so
both the terms of the distinction are the same. And in particular, of
the essence of a man, which, they say, is his soul, they affirm it, to
be all of it in his little finger, and all of it in every other part,
how small soever, of his body; and yet no more soul in the whole body,
than in any one of those parts. Can any man think that God is served
with such absurdities? And yet all this is necessary to believe, to
those that will believe the existence of an incorporeal soul, separated
from the body.

And when they come to give account how an incorporeal substance can be
capable of pain, and be tormented in the fire of hell or purgatory, they
have nothing at all to answer, but that it cannot be known how fire can
burn souls.

Again, whereas motion is change of place, and incorporeal substances are
not capable of place, they are troubled to make it seem possible, how a
soul can go hence, without the body, to heaven, hell, or purgatory; and
how the ghosts of men, and I may add of their clothes which they appear
in, can walk by night in churches, churchyards, and other places of
sepulture. To which I know not what they can answer, unless they will
say, they walk _definitivè_, not _circumscriptivè_, or _spiritually_,
not _temporally_: for such egregious distinctions are equally applicable
to any difficulty whatsoever.

[Sidenote: Nunc-stans.]

For the meaning of _eternity_, they will not have it to be an endless
succession of time; for then they should not be able to render a reason
how God’s will, and preordaining of things to come, should not be before
his prescience of the same, as the efficient cause before the effect, or
agent before the action; nor of many other their bold opinions
concerning the incomprehensible nature of God. But they will teach us,
that eternity is the standing still of the present time, a _nunc-stans_,
as the Schools call it; which neither they, nor any else understand, no
more than they would a _hic-stans_ for an infinite greatness of place.

[Sidenote: One body in many places, and many bodies in one place at
           once.]

And whereas men divide a body in their thought, by numbering parts of
it, and, in numbering those parts, number also the parts of the place it
filled; it cannot be, but in making many parts, we make also many places
of those parts; whereby there cannot be conceived in the mind of any
man, more, or fewer parts, than there are places for: yet they will have
us believe, that by the Almighty power of God, one body may be at one
and the same time in many places; and many bodies at one and the same
time in one place: as if it were an acknowledgment of the Divine Power
to say, that which is, is not; or that which has been, has not been. And
these are but a small part of the incongruities they are forced to, from
their disputing philosophically, instead of admiring, and adoring of the
divine and incomprehensible nature; whose attributes cannot signify what
he is, but ought to signify our desire to honour him, with the best
appellations we can think on. But they that venture to reason of his
nature, from these attributes of honour, losing their understanding in
the very first attempt, fall from one inconvenience into another,
without end, and without number; in the same manner, as when a man
ignorant of the ceremonies of court, coming into the presence of a
greater person than he is used to speak to, and stumbling at his
entrance, to save himself from falling, lets slip his cloak; to recover
his cloak, lets fall his hat; and with one disorder after another,
discovers his astonishment and rusticity.

[Sidenote: Absurdities in natural philosophy, as gravity the cause of
           heaviness.]

Then for _physics_, that is, the knowledge of the subordinate and
secondary causes of natural events; they render none at all, but empty
words. If you desire to know why some kind of bodies sink naturally
downwards toward the earth, and others go naturally from it; the Schools
will tell you out of Aristotle, that the bodies that sink downwards, are
_heavy_; and that this heaviness is it that causes them to descend. But
if you ask what they mean by _heaviness_, they will define it to be an
endeavour to go to the centre of the earth. So that the cause why things
sink downward, is an endeavour to be below: which is as much as to say,
that bodies descend, or ascend, because they do. Or they will tell you
the centre of the earth is the place of rest, and conservation for heavy
things; and therefore they endeavour to be there: as if stones and
metals had a desire, or could discern the place they would be at, as man
does; or loved rest, as man does not; or that a piece of glass were less
safe in the window, than falling into the street.

[Sidenote: Quantity put into body already made.]

If we would know why the same body seems greater, without adding to it,
one time, than another; they say, when it seems less, it is _condensed_;
when greater, _rarified_. What is that _condensed_, and _rarified_?
Condensed, is when there is in the very same matter, less quantity than
before; and rarified, when more. As if there could be matter, that had
not some determined quantity; when quantity is nothing else but the
determination of matter; that is to say, of body, by which we say, one
body is greater or lesser than another, by thus, or thus much. Or as if
a body were made without any quantity at all, and that afterwards more
or less were put into it, according as it is intended the body should be
more or less dense.

[Sidenote: Pouring in of souls.]

For the cause of the soul of man, they say, _creatur infundendo_, and
_creando infunditur_: that is, _it is created by pouring it in_, and
_poured in by creation_.

[Sidenote: Ubiquity of apparition.]

For the cause of sense, an ubiquity of _species_; that is, of the
_shows_ or _apparitions_ of objects; which when they be apparitions to
the eye, is _sight_; when to the ear, _hearing_; to the palate, _taste_;
to the nostril, _smelling_; and to the rest of the body, _feeling_.

[Sidenote: Will, the cause of willing.]

For cause of the will, to do any particular action, which is called
_volitio_, they assign the faculty, that is to say, the capacity in
general, that men have, to will sometimes one thing, sometimes another,
which is called _voluntas_; making the _power_ the cause of the _act_.
As if one should assign for cause of the good or evil acts of men, their
ability to do them.

[Sidenote: Ignorance an occult cause.]

And in many occasions they put for cause of natural events, their own
ignorance; but disguised in other words: as when they say, fortune is
the cause of things contingent; that is, of things whereof they know no
cause: and as when they attribute many effects to _occult qualities_;
that is, qualities not known to them; and therefore also, as they think,
to no man else. And to _sympathy_, _antipathy_, _antiperistasis_,
_specifical qualities_, and other like terms, which signify neither the
agent that produceth them, nor the operation by which they are produced.

If such _metaphysics_, and _physics_ as this, be not _vain philosophy_,
there was never any; nor needed St. Paul to give us warning to avoid it.

[Sidenote: One makes the things incongruent, another the incongruity.]

And for their moral, and civil philosophy, it hath the same, or greater
absurdities. If a man do an action of injustice, that is to say, an
action contrary to the law, God they say is the prime cause of the law,
and also the prime cause of that, and all other actions; but no cause at
all of the injustice; which is the inconformity of the action to the
law. This is vain philosophy. A man might as well say, that one man
maketh both a straight line, and a crooked, and another maketh their
incongruity. And such is the philosophy of all men that resolve of their
conclusions, before they know their premises; pretending to comprehend,
that which is incomprehensible; and of attributes of honour to make
attributes of nature; as this dictinction was made to maintain the
doctrine of free-will, that is, of a will of man, not subject to the
will of God.

[Sidenote: Private appetite the rule of public good.]

Aristotle, and other heathen philosophers, define good and evil, by the
appetite of men; and well enough, as long as we consider them governed
every one by his own law; for in the condition of men that have no other
law but their own appetites, there can be no general rule of good, and
evil actions. But in a commonwealth this measure is false: not the
appetite of private men, but the law, which is the will and appetite of
the state, is the measure. And yet is this doctrine still practised; and
men judge the goodness or wickedness of their own, and of other men’s
actions, and of the actions of the commonwealth itself, by their own
passions; and no man calleth good or evil, but that which is so in his
own eyes, without any regard at all to the public laws; except only
monks, and friars, that are bound by vow to that simple obedience to
their superior, to which every subject ought to think himself bound by
the law of nature to the civil sovereign. And this private measure of
good, is a doctrine, not only vain, but also pernicious to the public
state.

[Sidenote: And that lawful marriage is unchastity.]

It is also vain and false philosophy, to say the work of marriage is
repugnant to chastity, or continence, and by consequence to make them
moral vices; as they do, that pretend chastity, and continence, for the
ground of denying marriage to the clergy. For they confess it is no
more, but a constitution of the Church, that requireth in those holy
orders that continually attend the altar and administration of the
eucharist, a continual abstinence from women, under the name of
continual chastity, continence, and purity. Therefore they call the
lawful use of wives, want of chastity and continence; and so make
marriage a sin, or at least a thing so impure, and unclean, as to render
a man unfit for the altar. If the law were made because the use of wives
is incontinence, and contrary to chastity, then all marriage is vice: if
because it is a thing too impure, and unclean, for a man consecrated to
God; much more should other natural, necessary, and daily works which
all men do, render men unworthy to be priests, because they are more
unclean.

But the secret foundation of this prohibition of marriage of priests, is
not likely to have been laid so slightly, as upon such errors in moral
philosophy; nor yet upon the preference of single life, to the estate of
matrimony; which proceeded from the wisdom of St. Paul, who perceived
how inconvenient a thing it was, for those that in those times of
persecution were preachers of the gospel, and forced to fly from one
country to another, to be clogged with the care of wife and children;
but upon the design of the Popes, and priests of after times, to make
themselves the clergy, that is to say, sole heirs of the kingdom of God
in this world; to which it was necessary to take from them the use of
marriage; because our Saviour saith, that at the coming of his kingdom
the children of God _shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage, but
shall be as the angels in heaven_; that is to say, spiritual. Seeing
then they had taken on them the name of spiritual, to have allowed
themselves, when there was no need, the propriety of wives, had been an
incongruity.

[Sidenote: And that all government but popular is tyranny.]

From Aristotle’s civil philosophy, they have learned, to call all manner
of commonwealths but the popular, (such as was at that time the state of
Athens), _tyranny_. All kings they called tyrants; and the aristocracy
of the thirty governors set up there by the Lacedemonians that subdued
them, the thirty tyrants. As also to call the condition of the people
under the democracy, _liberty_. _A tyrant_ originally signified no more
simply, but a _monarch_. But when afterwards in most part of Greece that
kind of government was abolished, the name began to signify, not only
the thing it did before, but with it, the hatred which the popular
states bare towards it. As also the name of king became odious after the
deposing of the kings in Rome, as being a thing natural to all men, to
conceive some great fault to be signified in any attribute, that is
given in despite, and to a great enemy. And when the same men shall be
displeased with those that have the administration of the democracy, or
aristocracy, they are not to seek for disgraceful names to express their
anger in; but call readily the one _anarchy_, and the other _oligarchy_,
or the _tyranny of a few_. And that which offendeth the people, is no
other thing, but that they are governed, not as every one of them would
himself, but as the public representant, be it one man, or an assembly
of men, thinks fit; that is, by an arbitrary government: for which they
give evil names to their superiors; never knowing, till perhaps a little
after a civil war, that without such arbitrary government, such war must
be perpetual; and that it is men, and arms, not words and promises, that
make the force and power of the laws.

[Sidenote: That not men, but law governs.]

And therefore this is another error of Aristotle’s politics, that in a
well-ordered commonwealth, not men should govern, but the laws. What
man, that has his natural senses, though he can neither write nor read,
does not find himself governed by them he fears, and believes can kill
or hurt him when he obeyeth not? Or that believes the law can hurt him;
that is, words and paper, without the hands and swords of men? And this
is of the number of pernicious errors: for they induce men, as oft as
they like not their governors, to adhere to those that call them
tyrants, and to think it lawful to raise war against them: and yet they
are many times cherished from the pulpit, by the clergy.

[Sidenote: Laws over the conscience.]

There is another error in their civil philosophy, which they never
learned of Aristotle, nor Cicero, nor any other of the heathen, to
extend the power of the law, which is the rule of actions only, to the
very thoughts and consciences of men, by examination, and _inquisition_
of what they hold, notwithstanding the conformity of their speech and
actions. By which, men are either punished for answering the truth of
their thoughts, or constrained to answer an untruth for fear of
punishment. It is true, that the civil magistrate, intending to employ a
minister in the charge of teaching, may enquire of him, if he be content
to preach such and such doctrines; and in case of refusal, may deny him
the employment. But to force him to accuse himself of opinions, when his
actions are not by law forbidden, is against the law of nature; and
especially in them, who teach, that a man shall be damned to eternal and
extreme torments, if he die in a false opinion concerning an article of
the Christian faith. For who is there, that knowing there is so great
danger in an error, whom the natural care of himself, compelleth not to
hazard his soul upon his own judgment, rather than that of any other man
that is unconcerned in his damnation?

[Sidenote: Private interpretation of law.]

For a private man, without the authority of the commonwealth, that is to
say, without permission from the representant thereof, to interpret the
law by his own spirit, is another error in the politics: but not drawn
from Aristotle, nor from any other of the heathen philosophers. For none
of them deny, but that in the power of making laws, is comprehended also
the power of explaining them when there is need. And are not the
Scriptures, in all places where they are law, made law by the authority
of the commonwealth, and consequently, a part of the civil law?

Of the same kind it is also, when any but the sovereign restraineth in
any man that power which the commonwealth hath not restrained; as they
do, that impropriate the preaching of the gospel to one certain order of
men, where the laws have left it free. If the state give me leave to
preach, or teach; that is, if it forbid me not, no man can forbid me. If
I find myself amongst the idolaters of America, shall I that am a
Christian, though not in orders, think it a sin to preach Jesus Christ,
till I have received orders from Rome? Or when I have preached, shall
not I answer their doubts, and expound the Scriptures to them; that is,
shall I not teach? But for this may some say, as also for administering
to them the sacraments, the necessity shall be esteemed for a sufficient
mission; which is true: but this is true also, that for whatsoever, a
dispensation is due for the necessity, for the same there needs no
dispensation, when there is no law that forbids it. Therefore to deny
these functions to those, to whom the civil sovereign hath not denied
them, is a taking away of a lawful liberty, which is contrary to the
doctrine of civil government.

[Sidenote: Language of School divines.]

More examples of vain philosophy, brought into religion by the doctors
of School-divinity, might be produced; but other men may if they please
observe them of themselves. I shall only add this, that the writings of
School-divines, are nothing else for the most part, but insignificant
trains of strange and barbarous words, or words otherwise used, than in
the common use of the Latin tongue; such as would pose Cicero, and
Varro, and all the grammarians of ancient Rome. Which if any man would
see proved, let him, as I have said once before, see whether he can
translate any School-divine into any of the modern tongues, as French,
English, or any other copious language: for that which cannot in most of
these be made intelligible, is not intelligible in the Latin. Which
insignificancy of language, though I cannot note it for false
philosophy; yet it hath a quality, not only to hide the truth, but also
to make men think they have it, and desist from further search.

[Sidenote: Errors from tradition.]

Lastly, for the errors brought in from false, or uncertain history, what
is all the legend of fictitious miracles, in the lives of the saints;
and all the histories of apparitions, and ghosts, alleged by the doctors
of the Roman Church, to make good their doctrines of hell, and
purgatory, the power of exorcism, and other doctrines which have no
warrant, neither in reason, nor Scripture; as also all those traditions
which they call the unwritten word of God: but old wives’ fables?
Whereof, though they find dispersed somewhat in the writings of the
ancient fathers; yet those fathers were men, that might too easily
believe false reports; and the producing of their opinions for testimony
of the truth of what they believed, hath no other force with them that,
according to the counsel of St. John (_1 Epist._ iv. 1), examine
spirits, than in all things that concern the power of the Roman Church,
(the abuse whereof either they suspected not, or had benefit by it), to
discredit their testimony, in respect of too rash belief of reports;
which the most sincere men, without great knowledge of natural causes,
such as the fathers were, are commonly the most subject to. For
naturally, the best men are the least suspicious of fraudulent purposes.
Gregory the Pope, and St. Bernard have somewhat of apparitions of
ghosts, that said they were in purgatory; and so has our Bede: but no
where, I believe, but by report from others. But if they, or any other,
relate any such stories of their own knowledge, they shall not thereby
confirm the more such vain reports; but discover their own infirmity, or
fraud.

[Sidenote: Suppression of reason.]

With the introduction of false, we may join also the suppression of true
philosophy, by such men, as neither by lawful authority, nor sufficient
study, are competent judges of the truth. Our own navigations make
manifest, and all men learned in human sciences, now acknowledge there
are antipodes: and every day it appeareth more and more, that years and
days are determined by motions of the earth. Nevertheless, men that have
in their writings but supposed such doctrine, as an occasion to lay open
the reasons for, and against it, have been punished for it by authority
ecclesiastical. But what reason is there for it? Is it because such
opinions are contrary to true religion? That cannot be, if they be true.
Let therefore the truth be first examined by competent judges, or
confuted by them that pretend to know the contrary. Is it because they
be contrary to the religion established? Let them be silenced by the
laws of those, to whom the teachers of them are subject; that is, by the
laws civil. For disobedience may lawfully be punished in them, that
against the laws teach even true philosophy. Is it because they tend to
disorder in government, as countenancing rebellion, or sedition? Then
let them be silenced, and the teachers punished by virtue of his power
to whom the care of the public quiet is committed; which is the
authority civil. For whatsoever power ecclesiastics take upon
themselves, (in any place where they are subject to the state), in their
own right, though they call it God’s right, is but usurpation.


                                -------


                             CHAPTER XLVII.

                OF THE BENEFIT THAT PROCEEDETH FROM SUCH
                   DARKNESS, AND TO WHOM IT ACCRUETH.


[Sidenote: He that receiveth benefit by a fact, is presumed to be the
           author.]

Cicero maketh honourable mention of one of the Cassii, a severe judge
amongst the Romans, for a custom he had, in criminal causes, when the
testimony of the witnesses was not sufficient, to ask the accusers, _cui
bono_; that is to say, what profit, honour, or other contentment, the
accused obtained, or expected by the fact. For amongst presumptions,
there is none that so evidently declareth the author, as doth the
benefit of the action. By the same rule I intend in this place to
examine, who they may be that have possessed the people so long in this
part of Christendom, with these doctrines, contrary to the peaceable
societies of mankind.

[Sidenote: That the Church militant is the kingdom of God, was first
           taught by the Church of Rome:]

And first, to this error, _that the present Church now militant on
earth, is the kingdom of God_, (that is, the kingdom of glory, or the
land of promise; not the kingdom of grace, which is but a promise of the
land), are annexed these worldly benefits; first, that the pastors and
teachers of the Church, are entitled thereby, as God’s public ministers,
to a right of governing the Church; and consequently, because the Church
and commonwealth are the same persons, to be rectors, and governors of
the commonwealth. By this title it is, that the Pope prevailed with the
subjects of all Christian princes, to believe, that to disobey him, was
to disobey Christ himself; and in all differences between him and other
princes, (charmed with the word _power spiritual_), to abandon their
lawful sovereigns; which is in effect an universal monarchy over all
Christendom. For though they were first invested in the right of being
supreme teachers of Christian doctrine, by and under Christian emperors,
within the limits of the Roman empire, as is acknowledged by themselves,
by the title of _Pontifex Maximus_, who was an officer subject to the
civil state; yet after the empire was divided, and dissolved, it was not
hard to obtrude upon the people already subjected to them, another
title, namely, the right of St. Peter; not only to save entire their
pretended power; but also to extend the same over the same Christian
provinces, though no more united in the empire of Rome. This benefit of
an universal monarchy, (considering the desire of men to bear rule), is
a sufficient presumption, that the Popes that pretended to it, and for a
long time enjoyed it, were the authors of the doctrine, by which it was
obtained; namely, that the Church now on earth, is the kingdom of
Christ. For that granted, it must be understood, that Christ hath some
lieutenant amongst us, by whom we are to be told what are his
commandments.

After that certain Churches had renounced this universal power of the
Pope, one would expect in reason, that the civil sovereigns in all those
Churches, should have recovered so much of it, as before they had
unadvisedly let it go, was their own right, and in their own hands. And
in England it was so in effect; saving that they, by whom the kings
administered the government of religion, by maintaining their employment
to be in God’s right, seemed to usurp, if not a supremacy, yet an
independency on the civil power: and they but seemed to usurp it,
inasmuch as they acknowledged a right in the king, to deprive them of
the exercise of their functions at his pleasure.

[Sidenote: And maintained also by the Presbytery.]

But in those places where the presbytery took that office, though many
other doctrines of the Church of Rome were forbidden to be taught; yet
this doctrine, that the kingdom of Christ is already come, and that it
began at the resurrection of our Saviour, was still retained. But _cui
bono_? What profit did they expect from it? The same which the Popes
expected: to have a sovereign power over the people. For what is it for
men to excommunicate their lawful king, but to keep him from all places
of God’s public service in his own kingdom; and with force to resist
him, when he with force endeavoureth to correct them? Or what is it,
without authority from the civil sovereign, to excommunicate any person,
but to take from him his lawful liberty, that is, to usurp an unlawful
power over their brethren? The authors therefore of this darkness in
religion, are the Roman, and the presbyterian clergy.

[Sidenote: Infallibility.]

To this head, I refer also all those doctrines, that serve them to keep
the possession of this spiritual sovereignty after it is gotten, As
first, that the _Pope in his public capacity cannot err_. For who is
there, that believing this to be true, will not readily obey him in
whatsoever he commands?

[Sidenote: Subjection of bishops.]

Secondly, that all other bishops, in what commonwealth soever, have not
their right, neither immediately from God, nor mediately from their
civil sovereigns, but from the Pope, is a doctrine, by which there comes
to be in every Christian commonwealth many potent men, (for so are
bishops), that have their dependance on the Pope, and owe obedience to
him, though he be a foreign prince; by which means he is able, as he
hath done many times, to raise a civil war against the state that
submits not itself to be governed accordingly to his pleasure and
interest.

[Sidenote: Exemptions of the clergy.]

Thirdly, the exemption of these, and of all other priests, and of all
monks, and friars, from the power of the civil laws. For by this means,
there is a great part of every commonwealth, that enjoy the benefit of
the laws, and are protected by the power of the civil state, which
nevertheless pay no part of the public expense; nor are liable to the
penalties, as other subjects, due to their crimes; and consequently,
stand not in fear of any man, but the Pope; and adhere to him only, to
uphold his universal monarchy.

[Sidenote: The names of sacerdotes, and sacrificers.]

Fourthly, the giving to their priests, which is no more in the New
Testament but presbyters, that is, elders, the name of _sacerdotes_,
that is, sacrificers, which was the title of the civil sovereign, and
his public ministers, amongst the Jews, whilst God was their king. Also,
the making the Lord’s Supper a sacrifice, serveth to make the people
believe the Pope hath the same power over all Christians, that Moses and
Aaron had over the Jews; that is to say, all power, both civil and
ecclesiastical, as the high-priest then had.

[Sidenote: The sacramentation of marriage.]

Fifthly, the teaching that matrimony is a sacrament, giveth to the
clergy the judging of the lawfulness of marriages; and thereby, of what
children are legitimate; and consequently, of the right of succession to
hereditary kingdoms.

[Sidenote: The single life of priests.]

Sixthly, the denial of marriage to priests, serveth to assure this power
of the Pope over kings. For if a king be a priest, he cannot marry, and
transmit his kingdom to his posterity; if he be not a priest, then the
Pope pretendeth this authority ecclesiastical over him, and over his
people.

[Sidenote: Auricular confession.]

Seventhly, from auricular confession, they obtain, for the assurance of
their power, better intelligence of the designs of princes, and great
persons in the civil state, than these can have of the designs of the
state ecclesiastical.

[Sidenote: Canonization of saints, and declaring of martyrs.]

Eighthly, by the canonization of saints, and declaring who are martyrs,
they assure their power, in that they induce simple men into an
obstinacy against the laws and commands of their civil sovereigns even
to death, if by the Pope’s excommunication, they be declared heretics or
enemies to the Church; that is, as they interpret it, to the Pope.

[Sidenote: Transubstantiation, penance, absolution.]

Ninthly, they assure the same, by the power they ascribe to every
priest, of making Christ; and by the power of ordaining penance; and of
remitting, and retaining of sins.

[Sidenote: Purgatory, indulgences, external works.]

Tenthly, by the doctrine of purgatory, of justification by external
works, and of indulgences, the clergy is enriched.

[Sidenote: Demonology and exorcism.]

Eleventhly, by their demonology, and the use of exorcism, and other
things appertaining thereto, they keep, or think they keep, the people
more in awe of their power.

[Sidenote: School divinity.]

Lastly, the metaphysics, ethics, and politics of Aristotle, the
frivolous distinctions, barbarous terms, and obscure language of the
Schoolmen, taught in the universities, which have been all erected and
regulated by the Pope’s authority, serve them to keep these errors from
being detected, and to make men mistake the _ignis fatuus_ of vain
philosophy, for the light of the Gospel.

[Sidenote: The authors of spiritual darkness, who they be.]

To these, if they sufficed not, might be added other of their dark
doctrines, the profit whereof redoundeth manifestly, to the setting up
of an unlawful power over the lawful sovereigns of Christian people; or
for the sustaining of the same, when it is set up; or to the worldly
riches, honour, and authority of those that sustain it. And therefore by
the aforesaid rule, of _cui bono_, we may justly pronounce for the
authors of all this spiritual darkness, the Pope, and Roman clergy, and
all those besides that endeavour to settle in the minds of men this
erroneous doctrine, that the Church now on earth, is that kingdom of God
mentioned in the Old and New Testament.

But the emperors, and other Christian sovereigns, under whose government
these errors, and the like encroachments of ecclesiastics upon their
office, at first crept in, to the disturbance of their possessions, and
of the tranquillity of their subjects, though they suffered the same for
want of foresight of the sequel, and of insight into the designs of
their teachers, may nevertheless be esteemed accessories to their own,
and the public damage. For without their authority there could at first
no seditious doctrine have been publicly preached. I say they might have
hindered the same in the beginning: but when the people were once
possessed by those spiritual men, there was no human remedy to be
applied, that any man could invent. And for the remedies that God should
provide, who never faileth in his good time to destroy all the
machinations of men against the truth, we are to attend his good
pleasure, that suffereth many times the prosperity of his enemies,
together with their ambition, to grow to such a height, as the violence
thereof openeth the eyes, which the wariness of their predecessors had
before sealed up, and makes men by too much grasping let go all, as
Peter’s net was broken, by the struggling of too great a multitude of
fishes; whereas the impatience of those, that strive to resist such
encroachment, before their subjects’ eyes were opened, did but increase
the power they resisted. I do not therefore blame the emperor Frederick
for holding the stirrup to our countryman Pope Adrian; for such was the
disposition of his subjects then, as if he had not done it, he was not
likely to have succeeded in the empire. But I blame those, that in the
beginning, when their power was entire, by suffering such doctrines to
be forged in the universities of their own dominions, have holden the
stirrup to all the succeeding Popes, whilst they mounted into the
thrones of all Christian sovereigns, to ride, and tire, both them, and
their people at their pleasure.

But as the inventions of men are woven, so also are they ravelled out;
the way is the same, but the order is inverted. The web begins at the
first elements of power, which are wisdom, humility, sincerity, and
other virtues of the Apostles, whom the people, converted, obeyed out of
reverence, not by obligation. Their consciences were free, and their
words and actions subject to none but the civil power. Afterwards the
presbyters, as the flocks of Christ increased, assembling to consider
what they should teach, and thereby obliging themselves to teach nothing
against the decrees of their assemblies, made it to be thought the
people were thereby obliged to follow their doctrine, and when they
refused, refused to keep them company, (that was then called
excommunication), not as being infidels, but as being disobedient: and
this was the first knot upon their liberty. And the number of presbyters
increasing, the presbyters of the chief city or province, got themselves
an authority over the parochial presbyters, and appropriated to
themselves the names of bishops: and this was a second knot on Christian
liberty. Lastly, the bishop of Rome, in regard of the imperial city,
took upon him an authority, (partly by the wills of the emperors
themselves, and by the title of _Pontifex Maximus_, and at last when the
emperors were grown weak, by the privileges of St. Peter), over all
other bishops of the empire: which was the third and last knot, and the
whole _synthesis_ and _construction_, of the pontificial power.

And therefore the _analysis_, or _resolution_, is by the same way; but
beginneth with the knot that was last tied; as we may see in the
dissolution of the præterpolitical Church government in England. First,
the power of the Popes was dissolved totally by Queen Elizabeth; and the
bishops, who before exercised their functions in right of the Pope, did
afterwards exercise the same in right of the Queen and her successors;
though by retaining the phrase of _jure divino_, they were thought to
demand it by immediate right from God: and so was untied the third knot.
After this, the presbyterians lately in England obtained the putting
down of episcopacy: and so was the second knot dissolved. And almost at
the same time, the power was taken also from the presbyterians: and so
we are reduced to the independancy of the primitive Christians, to
follow Paul, or Cephas, or Apollos, every man as he liketh best: which,
if it be without contention, and without measuring the doctrine of
Christ, by our affection to the person of his minister, (the fault which
the apostle reprehended in the Corinthians), is perhaps the best. First,
because there ought to be no power over the consciences of men, but of
the Word itself, working faith in every one, not always according to the
purpose of them that plant and water, but of God himself, that giveth
the increase. And secondly, because it is unreasonable in them, who
teach there is such danger in every little error, to require of a man
endued with reason of his own, to follow the reason of any other man, or
of the most voices of any other men, which is little better than to
venture his salvation at cross and pile. Nor ought those teachers to be
displeased with this loss of their ancient authority. For there is none
should know better than they, that power is preserved by the same
virtues by which it is acquired; that is to say, by wisdom, humility,
clearness of doctrine, and sincerity of conversation; and not by
suppression of the natural sciences, and of the morality of natural
reason; nor by obscure language; nor by arrogating to themselves more
knowledge than they make appear; nor by pious frauds; nor by such other
faults, as in the pastors of God’s Church are not only faults, but also
scandals, apt to make men stumble one time or other upon the suppression
of their authority.

[Sidenote: Comparison of the papacy with the kingdom of fairies.]

But after this doctrine, _that the Church now militant, is the kingdom
of God spoken of in the Old and New Testament_, was received in the
world; the ambition, and canvassing for the offices that belong
thereunto, and especially for that great office of being Christ’s
lieutenant, and the pomp of them that obtained therein the principal
public charges, became by degrees so evident, that they lost the inward
reverence due to the pastoral function: insomuch as the wisest men, of
them that had any power in the civil state, needed nothing but the
authority of their princes, to deny them any further obedience. For,
from the time that the Bishop of Rome had gotten to be acknowledged for
bishop universal, by pretence of succession to St. Peter, their whole
hierarchy, or kingdom of darkness, may be compared not unfitly to the
_kingdom of fairies_; that is, to the old wives’ _fables_ in England,
concerning _ghosts_ and _spirits_, and the feats they play in the night.
And if a man consider the original of this great ecclesiastical
dominion, he will easily perceive, that the Papacy is no other than the
_ghost_ of the deceased _Roman empire_, sitting crowned upon the grave
thereof. For so did the Papacy start up on a sudden out of the ruins of
that heathen power.

The _language_ also, which they use, both in the churches, and in their
public acts, being _Latin_, which is not commonly used by any nation now
in the world, what is it but the _ghost_ of the old _Roman language_?

The _fairies_ in what nation soever they converse, have but one
universal king, which some poets of ours call King Oberon; but the
Scripture calls Beelzebub, prince of _demons_. The _ecclesiastics_
likewise, in whose dominions soever they be found, acknowledge but one
universal king, the _Pope_.

The _ecclesiastics_ are _spiritual_ men, and _ghostly_ fathers. The
fairies are _spirits_, and _ghosts_. _Fairies_ and _ghosts_ inhabit
darkness, solitudes, and graves. The _ecclesiastics_ walk in obscurity
of doctrine, in monasteries, churches, and church-yards.

The _ecclesiastics_ have their cathedral churches, which, in what town
soever they be erected, by virtue of holy water, and certain charms
called exorcisms, have the power to make those towns, cities, that is to
say, seats of empire. The _fairies_ also have their enchanted castles,
and certain gigantic ghosts, that domineer over the regions round about
them.

The _fairies_ are not to be seized on; and brought to answer for the
hurt they do. So also the _ecclesiastics_ vanish away from the tribunals
of civil justice.

The _ecclesiastics_ take from young men the use of reason, by certain
charms compounded of metaphysics, and miracles, and traditions, and
abused Scripture, whereby they are good for nothing else, but to execute
what they command them. The _fairies_ likewise are said to take young
children out of their cradles, and to change them into natural fools,
which common people do therefore call _elves_, and are apt to mischief.

In what shop, or operatory the fairies make their enchantment, the old
wives have not determined. But the operatories of the _clergy_ are well
enough known to be the universities, that received their discipline from
authority pontificial.

When the _fairies_ are displeased with any body, they are said to send
their elves, to pinch them. The _ecclesiastics_, when they are
displeased with any civil state, make also their elves, that is,
superstitious, enchanted subjects, to pinch their princes, by preaching
sedition; or one prince enchanted with promises, to pinch another.

The _fairies_ marry not; but there be amongst them _incubi_, that have
copulation with flesh and blood. The _priests_ also marry not.

The _ecclesiastics_ take the cream of the land, by donations of ignorant
men, that stand in awe of them, and by tithes. So also it is in the
fable of _fairies_, that they enter into the dairies, and feast upon the
cream, which they skim from the milk.

What kind of money is current in the kingdom of _fairies_, is not
recorded in the story. But the _ecclesiastics_ in their receipts accept
of the same money that we do; though when they are to make any payment,
it is in canonizations, indulgencies, and masses.

To this, and such like resemblances between the _papacy_, and the
kingdom of _fairies_, may be added this, that as the _fairies_ have no
existence, but in the fancies of ignorant people, rising from the
traditions of old wives, or old poets: so the spiritual power of the
_Pope_, without the bounds of his own civil dominion, consisteth only in
the fear that seduced people stand in, of their excommunications; upon
hearing of false miracles, false traditions, and false interpretations
of the Scripture.

It was not therefore a very difficult matter, for Henry VIII by his
exorcism; nor for queen Elizabeth by hers, to cast them out. But who
knows that this spirit of Rome, now gone out, and walking by missions
through the dry places of China, Japan, and the Indies, that yield him
little fruit, may not return, or rather an assembly of spirits worse
than he, enter, and inhabit this clean swept house, and make the end
thereof worse than the beginning? For it is not the Roman clergy only,
that pretends the kingdom of God to be of this world, and thereby to
have a power therein, distinct from that of the civil state. And this is
all I had a design to say, concerning the doctrine of the POLITICS.
Which when I have reviewed, I shall willingly expose it to the censure
of my country.


                       A REVIEW, AND CONCLUSION.


[Sidenote: Review, and conclusion.]

From the contrariety of some of the natural faculties of the mind, one
to another, as also of one passion to another, and from their reference
to conversation, there has been an argument taken, to infer an
impossibility that any one man should be sufficiently disposed to all
sorts of civil duty. The severity of judgment, they say, makes men
censorious, and unapt to pardon the errors and infirmities of other men:
and on the other side, celerity of fancy, makes the thoughts less steady
than is necessary, to discern exactly between right and wrong. Again, in
all deliberations, and in all pleadings, the faculty of solid reasoning
is necessary: for without it, the resolutions of men are rash, and their
sentences unjust: and yet if there be not powerful eloquence, which
procureth attention and consent, the effect of reason will be little.
But these are contrary faculties; the former being grounded upon
principles of truth; the other upon opinions already received, true or
false; and upon the passions and interests of men, which are different,
and mutable.

And amongst the passions, _courage_, (by which I mean the contempt of
wounds, and violent death) inclineth men to private revenges, and
sometimes to endeavour the unsettling of the public peace: and
_timorousness_, many times disposeth to the desertion of the public
defence. Both these, they say, cannot stand together in the same person.

And to consider the contrariety of men’s opinions, and manners, in
general, it is, they say, impossible to entertain a constant civil amity
with all those, with whom the business of the world constrains us to
converse: which business consisteth almost in nothing else but a
perpetual contention for honour, riches, and authority.

To which I answer, that these are indeed great difficulties, but not
impossibilities: for by education, and discipline, they may be, and are
sometimes reconciled. Judgment and fancy may have place in the same man;
but by turns; as the end which he aimeth at requireth. As the Israelites
in Egypt, were sometimes fastened to their labour of making bricks, and
other times were ranging abroad to gather straw: so also may the
judgment sometimes be fixed upon one certain consideration, and the
fancy at another time wandering about the world. So also reason, and
eloquence, though not perhaps in the natural sciences, yet, in the
moral, may stand very well together. For wheresoever there is place for
adorning and preferring of error, there is much more place for adorning
and preferring of truth, if they have it to adorn. Nor is there any
repugnancy between fearing the laws, and not fearing a public enemy; nor
between abstaining from injury, and pardoning it in others. There is
therefore no such inconsistence of human nature, with civil duties, as
some think. I have known clearness of judgment, and largeness of fancy;
strength of reason, and graceful elocution; a courage for the war, and a
fear for the laws, and all eminently in one man; and that was my most
noble and honoured friend, Mr. Sidney Godolphin; who hating no man, nor
hated of any, was unfortunately slain in the beginning of the late civil
war, in the public quarrel, by an undiscerned and an undiscerning hand.

To the Laws of Nature, declared in Chapter XV., I would have this added,
_that every man is bound by nature, as much as in him lieth, to protect
in war the authority, by which he is himself protected in time of
peace_. For he that pretendeth a right of nature to preserve his own
body, cannot pretend a right of nature to destroy him, by whose strength
he is preserved: it is a manifest contradiction of himself. And though
this law may be drawn by consequence, from some of those that are there
already mentioned; yet the times require to have it inculcated, and
remembered.

And because I find by divers English books lately printed, that the
civil wars have not yet sufficiently taught men in what point of time it
is, that a subject becomes obliged to the conqueror; nor what is
conquest; nor how it comes about, that it obliges men to obey his laws:
therefore for further satisfaction of men therein, I say, the point of
time, wherein a man becomes subject to a conqueror, is that point,
wherein having liberty to submit to him, he consenteth, either by
express words, or by other sufficient sign, to be his subject. When it
is that a man hath the liberty to submit, I have showed before in the
end of Chapter XXI.; namely, that for him that hath no obligation to his
former sovereign but that of an ordinary subject, it is then, when the
means of his life are within the guards and garrisons of the enemy; for
it is then, that he hath no longer protection from him, but is protected
by the adverse party for his contribution. Seeing therefore such
contribution is every where, as a thing inevitable, notwithstanding it
be an assistance to the enemy, esteemed lawful; a total submission,
which is but an assistance to the enemy, cannot be esteemed unlawful.
Besides, if a man consider that they who submit, assist the enemy but
with part of their estates, whereas they that refuse, assist him with
the whole, there is no reason to call their submission, or composition,
an assistance; but rather a detriment to the enemy. But if a man,
besides the obligation of a subject, hath taken upon him a new
obligation of a soldier, then he hath not the liberty to submit to a new
power, as long as the old one keeps the field, and giveth him means of
subsistence, either in his armies, or garrisons: for in this case, he
cannot complain of want of protection, and means to live as a soldier.
But when that also fails, a soldier also may seek his protection
wheresoever he has most hope to have it; and may lawfully submit himself
to his new master. And so much for the time when he may do it lawfully,
if he will. If therefore he do it, he is undoubtedly bound to be a true
subject: for a contract lawfully made, cannot lawfully be broken.

By this also a man may understand, when it is, that men may be said to
be conquered; and in what the nature of conquest, and the right of a
conqueror consisteth: for this submission in itself implieth them all.
Conquest, is not the victory itself; but the acquisition, by victory, of
a right over the persons of men. He therefore that is slain, is
overcome, but not conquered: he that is taken, and put into prison, or
chains, is not conquered, though overcome; for he is still an enemy, and
may save himself if he can: but he that upon promise of obedience, hath
his life and liberty allowed him, is then conquered, and a subject; and
not before. The Romans used to say, that their general had _pacified_
such a _province_, that is to say, in English, _conquered_ it; and that
the country was _pacified_ by victory, when the people of it had
promised _imperata facere_, that is, _to do what the Roman people
commanded them_: this was to be conquered. But this promise may be
either express, or tacit: express, by promise: tacit, by other signs. As
for example, a man that hath not been called to make such an express
promise, because he is one whose power perhaps is not considerable; yet
if he live under their protection openly, he is understood to submit
himself to the government: but if he live there secretly, he is liable
to anything that may be done to a spy, and enemy of the state. I say
not, he does any injustice; for acts of open hostility bear not that
name; but that he may be justly put to death. Likewise, if a man, when
his country is conquered, be out of it, he is not conquered, nor
subject: but if at his return, he submit to the government, he is bound
to obey it. So that _conquest_, to define it, is the acquiring of the
right of sovereignty by victory. Which right, is acquired in the
people’s submission, by which they contract with the victor, promising
obedience, for life and liberty.

In Chapter XXIX., I have set down for one of the causes of the
dissolutions of commonwealths, their imperfect generation, consisting in
the want of an absolute and arbitrary legislative power; for want
whereof, the civil sovereign is fain to handle the sword of justice
unconstantly, and as if it were too hot for him to hold. One reason
whereof, which I have not there mentioned, is this, that they will all
of them justify the war, by which their power was at first gotten, and
whereon, as they think, their right dependeth, and not on the
possession. As if, for example, the right of the kings of England did
depend on the goodness of the cause of William the Conqueror, and upon
their lineal, and directest descent from him; by which means, there
would perhaps be no tie of the subjects’ obedience to their sovereign at
this day in all the world: wherein whilst they needlessly think to
justify themselves, they justify all the successful rebellions that
ambition shall at any time raise against them, and their successors.
Therefore I put down for one of the most effectual seeds of the death of
any state, that the conquerors require not only a submission of men’s
actions to them for the future, but also an approbation of all their
actions past; when there is scarce a commonwealth in the world, whose
beginnings can in conscience be justified.

And because the name of tyranny, signifieth nothing more, nor less, than
the name of sovereignty, be it in one, or many men, saving that they
that use the former word, are understood to be angry with them they call
tyrants; I think the toleration of a professed hatred of tyranny, is a
toleration of hatred to commonwealth in general, and another evil seed,
not differing much from the former. For to the justification of the
cause of a conqueror, the reproach of the cause of the conquered, is for
the most part necessary: but neither of them necessary for the
obligation of the conquered. And thus much I have thought fit to say
upon the review of the first and second part of this discourse.

In Chapter XXXV., I have sufficiently declared out of the Scripture,
that in the commonwealth of the Jews, God himself was made the
sovereign, by pact with the people; who were therefore called his
_peculiar people_, to distinguish them from the rest of the world, over
whom God reigned not by their consent, but by his own power: and that in
this kingdom Moses was God’s lieutenant on earth; and that it was he
that told them what laws God appointed them to be ruled by. But I have
omitted to set down who were the officers appointed to do execution;
especially in capital punishments; not then thinking it a matter of so
necessary consideration, as I find it since. We know that generally in
all commonwealths, the execution of corporal punishments, was either put
upon the guards, or other soldiers of the sovereign power; or given to
those, in whom want of means, contempt of honour, and hardness of heart,
concurred, to make them sue for such an office. But amongst the
Israelites it was a positive law of God their sovereign, that he that
was convicted of a capital crime, should be stoned to death by the
people; and that the witnesses should cast the first stone, and after
the witnesses, then the rest of the people. This was a law that designed
who were to be the executioners; but not that any one should throw a
stone at him before conviction and sentence, where the congregation was
judge. The witnesses were nevertheless to be heard before they proceeded
to execution, unless the fact were committed in the presence of the
congregation itself, or in sight of the lawful judges; for then there
needed no other witnesses but the judges themselves. Nevertheless, this
manner of proceeding being not thoroughly understood, hath given
occasion to a dangerous opinion, that any man may kill another, in some
cases, by a right of zeal; as if the executions done upon offenders in
the kingdom of God in old time, proceeded not from the sovereign
command, but from the authority of private zeal: which, if we consider
the texts that seem to favour it, is quite contrary.

First, where the Levites fell upon the people, that had made and
worshipped the Golden Calf, and slew three thousand of them; it was by
the commandment of Moses, from the mouth of God; as is manifest, _Exod._
xxxii. 27. And when the son of a woman of Israel had blasphemed God,
they that heard it, did not kill him, but brought him before Moses, who
put him under custody, till God should give sentence against him; as
appears, _Levit._ xxiv. 11, 12. Again, (_Numb._ xxv. 6, 7), when
Phinehas killed Zimri and Cosbi, it was not by right of private zeal:
their crime was committed in the sight of the assembly; there needed no
witness; the law was known, and he the heir-apparent to the sovereignty;
and, which is the principal point, the lawfulness of his act depended
wholly upon a subsequent ratification by Moses, whereof he had no cause
to doubt. And this presumption of a future ratification, is sometimes
necessary to the safety of a commonwealth; as in a sudden rebellion, any
man that can suppress it by his own power in the country where it
begins, without express law or commission, may lawfully do it, and
provide to have it ratified, or pardoned, whilst it is in doing, or
after it is done. Also _Numb._ xxxv. 30, it is expressly said,
_Whosoever shall kill the murderer, shall kill him upon the word of
witnesses_: but witnesses suppose a formal judicature, and consequently
condemn that pretence of _jus zelotarum_. The law of Moses concerning
him that enticeth to idolatry, that is to say, in the kingdom of God to
a renouncing of his allegiance, (_Deut._ xiii. 8, 9), forbids to conceal
him, and commands the accuser to cause him to be put to death, and to
cast the first stone at him; but not to kill him before he be condemned.
And (_Deut._ xvii. 4, 5, 6, 7), the process against idolatry is exactly
set down: for God there speaketh to the people, as judge, and commandeth
them, when a man is accused of idolatry, to enquire diligently of the
fact, and finding it true, then to stone him; but still the hand of the
witness throweth the first stone. This is not private zeal, but public
condemnation. In like manner when a father hath a rebellious son, the
law is, (_Deut._ xxi. 18-21), that he shall bring him before the judges
of the town, and all the people of the town shall stone him. Lastly, by
pretence of these laws it was, that St. Stephen was stoned, and not by
pretence of private zeal: for before he was carried away to execution,
he had pleaded his cause before the high-priest. There is nothing in all
this, nor in any other part of the Bible, to countenance executions by
private zeal; which being oftentimes but a conjunction of ignorance and
passion, is against both the justice and peace of a commonwealth.

[Sidenote: Review, and conclusion.]

In chapter XXXVI., I have said, that it is not declared in what manner
God spake supernaturally to Moses: nor that he spake not to him
sometimes by dreams and visions, and by a supernatural voice, as to
other prophets: for the manner how he spake unto him from the
mercy-seat, is expressly set down, _Numbers_ vii. 89, in these words,
_From that time forward, when Moses entered into the Tabernacle of the
congregation to speak with God, he heard a voice which spake unto him
from over the mercy-seat, which is over the Ark of the testimony; from
between the cherubims he spake unto him_. But it is not declared in what
consisteth the preeminence of the manner of God’s speaking to Moses,
above that of his speaking to other prophets, as to Samuel, and to
Abraham, to whom he also spake by a voice, (that is, by vision), unless
the difference consist in the clearness of the vision. For _face to
face_, and _mouth to mouth_, cannot be literally understood of the
infiniteness, and incomprehensibility of the Divine nature.

And as to the whole doctrine, I see not yet, but the principles of it
are true and proper; and the ratiocination solid. For I ground the civil
right of sovereigns, and both the duty and liberty of subjects, upon the
known natural inclinations of mankind, and upon the articles of the law
of nature; of which no man, that pretends but reason enough to govern
his private family, ought to be ignorant. And for the power
ecclesiastical of the same sovereigns, I ground it on such texts, as are
both evident in themselves, and consonant to the scope of the whole
Scripture. And therefore am persuaded, that he that shall read it with a
purpose only to be informed, shall be informed by it. But for those that
by writing, or public discourse, or by their eminent actions, have
already engaged themselves to the maintaining of contrary opinions, they
will not be so easily satisfied. For in such cases, it is natural for
men, at one and the same time, both to proceed in reading, and to lose
their attention, in the search of objections to that they had read
before. Of which in a time wherein the interests of men are changed,
(seeing much of that doctrine, which serveth to the establishing of a
new government, must needs be contrary to that which conduced to the
dissolution of the old), there cannot choose but be very many.

In that part which treateth of a Christian commonwealth, there are some
new doctrines, which, it may be, in a state where the contrary were
already fully determined, were a fault for a subject without leave to
divulge, as being an usurpation of the place of a teacher. But in this
time, that men call not only for peace, but also for truth, to offer
such doctrines as I think true, and that manifestly tend to peace and
loyalty, to the consideration of those that are yet in deliberation, is
no more, but to offer new wine, to be put into new casks, that both may
be preserved together. And I suppose, that then, when novelty can breed
no trouble nor disorder in a state, men are not generally so much
inclined to the reverence of antiquity, as to prefer ancient errors,
before new and well-proved truth.

There is nothing I distrust more than my elocution, which nevertheless I
am confident, excepting the mischances of the press, is not obscure.
That I have neglected the ornament of quoting ancient poets, orators,
and philosophers, contrary to the custom of late time, whether I have
done well or ill in it, proceedeth from my judgment, grounded on many
reasons. For first, all truth of doctrine dependeth either upon
_reason_, or upon _Scripture_; both which give credit to many, but never
receive it from any writer. Secondly, the matters in question are not of
_fact_, but of _right_, wherein there is no place for _witnesses_. There
is scarce any of those old writers, that contradicteth not sometimes
both himself and others; which makes their testimonies insufficient.
Fourthly, such opinions as are taken only upon credit of antiquity, are
not intrinsically the judgment of those that cite them, but words that
pass, like gaping, from mouth to mouth. Fifthly, it is many times with a
fraudulent design that men stick their corrupt doctrine with the cloves
of other men’s wit. Sixthly, I find not that the ancients they cite,
took it for an ornament, to do the like with those that wrote before
them. Seventhly, it is an argument of indigestion, when Greek and Latin
sentences unchewed come up again, as they use to do, unchanged. Lastly,
though I reverence those men of ancient time, that either have written
truth perspicuously, or set us in a better way to find it out ourselves;
yet to the antiquity itself I think nothing due. For if we will
reverence the age, the present is the oldest. If the antiquity of the
writer, I am not sure, that generally they to whom such honour is given,
were more ancient when they wrote, than I am that am writing. But if it
be well considered, the praise of ancient authors, proceeds not from the
reverence of the dead, but from the competition, and mutual envy of the
living.

[Sidenote: Review, and conclusion.]

To conclude, there is nothing in this whole discourse, nor in that I
writ before of the same subject in Latin, as far as I can perceive,
contrary either to the Word of God, or to good manners; or to the
disturbance of the public tranquillity. Therefore I think it may be
profitably printed, and more profitably taught in the Universities, in
case they also think so, to whom the judgment of the same belongeth. For
seeing the Universities are the fountains of civil and moral doctrine,
from whence the preachers, and the gentry, drawing such water as they
find, use to sprinkle the same (both from the pulpit and in their
conversation), upon the people, there ought certainly to be great care
taken, to have it pure, both from the venom of heathen politicians, and
from the incantation of deceiving spirits. And by that means the most
men, knowing their duties, will be the less subject to serve the
ambition of a few discontented persons, in their purposes against the
state; and be the less grieved with the contributions necessary for
their peace, and defence; and the governors themselves have the less
cause, to maintain at the common charge any greater army, than is
necessary to make good the public liberty, against the invasions and
encroachments of foreign enemies.

And thus I have brought to an end my Discourse of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government, occasioned by the disorders of the present
time, without partiality, without application, and without other design
than to set before men’s eyes the mutual relation between protection and
obedience; of which the condition of human nature, and the laws divine,
both natural and positive, require an inviolable observation. And though
in the revolution of states, there can be no very good constellation for
truths of this nature to be born under, (as having an angry aspect from
the dissolvers of an old government, and seeing but the backs of them
that erect a new), yet I cannot think it will be condemned at this time,
either by the public judge of doctrine, or by any that desires the
continuance of public peace. And in this hope I return to my interrupted
speculation of bodies natural; wherein, if God give me health to finish
it, I hope the novelty will as much please, as in the doctrine of this
artificial body it useth to offend. For such truth, as opposeth no man’s
profit, nor pleasure, is to all men welcome.




                                 FINIS.




                C. RICHARDS, PRINTER, ST. MARTIN’S LANE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                     BOOKS PUBLISHED BY JOHN BOHN.

                                  ---

                           THE ENGLISH WORKS
                                   OF
                     THOMAS HOBBES, OF MALMESBURY,
                   NOW FIRST COLLECTED AND EDITED BY
                  SIR WILLIAM MOLESWORTH, BART. M. P.

                                 VOL I.

                               CONTAINING

                LOGIC: THE FIRST GROUNDS OF PHILOSOPHY:
               THE PROPORTIONS OF MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES:
                AND PHYSICS, OR THE PHENOMENA OF NATURE:

                                  ---

                                 ALSO,

                     THOMÆ HOBBES, MALMESBURIENSIS

                          OPERA PHILOSOPHICA,
                          QUÆ LATINE SCRIPSIT,
                                 OMNIA.

                                VOL. I.

                            QUO CONTINENTUR
               AUCTORIS VITA: ET ELEMENTORUM PHILOSOPHIÆ.
                       SECTIO PRIMA, DE CORPORE.

 “The philosophical Public are much indebted to SIR WILLIAM MOLESWORTH
                   for this new edition.”--SPECTATOR.

                                -------

                             IN THE PRESS.

                      FIELD’S BOOK OF THE CHURCH;
                       A NEW EDITION, WITH NOTES,
                                   BY
                        THE REV. JOHN S. BREWER.

                                  ---

                       THE DEATH OF DEMOSTHENES;
                            A DRAMATIC POEM;
                       BY GEORGE CROKER FOX, ESQ.

                                  ---

                   AN APOLOGY FOR CATHEDRAL SERVICE.

                                  ---

                          ARRIAN ON COURSING.

Translated from the Greek, with Classical and Practical Annotations, and
    a brief Sketch of the Life of the Author. To which is added an
    Appendix, containing some Account of the Canes Venatici of Classical
    Antiquity, royal 8vo. _with 24 embellishments from the Antique, on
    India paper_, extra boards, 1_l._ 11_s._ 6_d._

              BRYDGES’ (THE RIGHT HON. SIR HARFORD JONES)
                            WORKS ON PERSIA.

The Dynasty of the Kajars, translated from the original Persian
    Manuscript presented by His Majesty Faty Aly Shah to Sir Harford
    Jones Brydges, Bart. K.C. LLD. late Envoy Extraordinary and Minister
    Plenipotentiary from his Britannic Majesty to the Court of Teheran.
    To which is prefixed, a succinct Account of the History of Persia
    previous to that Period, 8vo. with frontispiece and 3 maps, boards,
    1_l._ 4_s._

An Account of the Transactions of His Majesty’s Mission to the Court of
    Persia in the Years 1807-11, by Sir Harford Jones Brydges, Bart. To
    which is added a brief History of the Wahauby, 2 vols. 8vo. plates,
    bds. 1_l._ 1_s._

                DANSEY’S (REV. WM.) WORK ON RURAL DEANS.

Horæ Decanicæ Rurales, being an Attempt to illustrate, by a Series of
    Notes and Extracts, the Name and Title, the Origin, Appointment, and
    Functions of Rural Deans, &c. 2 vols. 4to. half-bound morocco,
    uncut, top edges gilt, 1_l._ 11_s._ 6_d._

 _Archdeacon Goddard, in his recent charge, strongly recommends this work
              to the attentive perusal of every clergyman._

                   HIGGINS’ (GODFREY) CELTIC DRUIDS;

Or an Attempt to show that the Druids were the Priests of Oriental
    Colonies, who emigrated from India, and were the Introducers of the
    first or Cadmean System of Letters, and the Builders of STONEHENGE,
    of Carnac, and of other Cyclopean Works in Asia and Europe, 4to. map
    and numerous plates, bds. 3_l._

                       _Also, by the same Author_,

 Anacalypsis, an Attempt to draw aside the Veil of the Saitic Isis; or an
                                 Inquiry
    into the Origin of Languages, Nations and Religions, 2 vols. 4to.
                            plates, bds. 5_l._

                    SEWELL’S (REV. PROFESSOR) WORKS:

Essay on the Cultivation of the Intellect, by the Study of Dead
    Languages, crown 8vo. canvas boards, 9_s._

Hora Philologica, or Conjectures of the Structure of the Greek Language,
    royal 8vo. boards, 7_s._

Sermons on the Application of Christianity to the Human Heart, royal
    8vo. canvas boards, 12_s._

Parochial Sermons, 12mo. boards, 5_s._

                        TAYLOR’S (BP. JEREMY) WORKS,

    With Life by Bp. Heber, 15 vols. 8vo. bds. 7_l._ 17_s._ 6_d._

                           THEATRE OF THE GREEKS.

A Series of Papers relating to the History and Criticism of the Greek
    Drama, 4th edition, with a new Introduction and other Alterations by
    J. W. Donaldson, 8vo. boards, 15_s._

                 WOODVILLE’S (DR. WILLIAM) MEDICAL BOTANY;

THIRD EDITION, MATERIALLY ENLARGED AND IMPROVED by Professor SIR WILLIAM
    JACKSON HOOKER, LLD. F.R.S. L.S. &c. and G. SPRATT, ESQ. 5 vols.
    4to. 310 plates, engraved by Sowerby and Spratt, boards, 5_l._
    15_s._ 6_d._ or with the plates FINELY COLOURED, 8_l._.

    The impression is limited to 250 copies. A few of the additional
      volume have been taken off separately, to accommodate Subscribers
      to former editions, price 2_l._ 2_s._ _plain_, or 2_l._ 12_s._
      6_d._ _coloured_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              Transcriber’s Note

      Other errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been
      corrected, and are noted here. The references are to the page and
      line in the original.

  34.7     I as[s]cribe to the giving of names            Removed.

  37.27    he that p[er/re]tendeth the science            Transposed.

  66.20    to[ to] take from the spirit                   Removed.

  108.6    to cho[o]se them a king                        Inserted.

  178.22   or arist[r]ocracy of another commonwealth      Removed.

  217.34   For [roo f/proof] whereof                      Replaced.

  240.11   with[t h/ th]eir metropolis                    Move space.

  323.3    rights of sov[e]reignty                        Inserted.

  323.4    Against the[ the] duty of a sovereign          Removed.

  385.23   the _breath of life_ in[s]pired by God         Inserted.

  408.1    (_Acts_[,] xiii. 46)                           Removed.

  430.22   (as it is[ in] verse 5)                        is ‘said’
                                                          in?

  447.15   ε[ἰ/ὶ]ς τὸ σκοτος                              Replaced.

  493.13   hold[i n/ing] firmly in his heart              Replaced.

  497.1    We have first (_Matth._ x. 6, 7[,)/)], that    Transposed?

  526.8    any other rule[r]                              Added.

  527.11   St. Matthew and St. John apos[ /t]les          Restored.

  601.25   (verses 11, 12[,)/),] the judgment             Tranposed.

  704.34   He therefore that [i]s slain                   Added.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENGLISH WORKS OF THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY, VOLUME 03 (OF 11) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



